===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
  
July 19 
1.06-190320-01 
300 Hamilton Blvd., Ste. 300, Peoria, IL 61629-3810, U.S.A.  
 
 
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE 
Backlog Parts Staging 
Containers For HMS 
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
Backlog Parts Staging Containers For HMS .............. 1 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 4 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 5 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information pro vided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Backlog Parts Containers for HMS 
DATE 
7/31/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1.06-190320-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 5 
1.0 Introduction  
 
The backlog management process starts when the recorded defect gets converted into a work 
order, put into a work plan, and parts are then ordered for the execution of the job. If the ordered 
parts are not available on site, they will have to be backordered from the Dealer main warehouse 
or from a Caterpillar distribution center. Backordered parts can take several days to arrive, 
depending on availability and source; parts may also be non-Caterpillar outside purchases. As 
the ordered parts arrive at different times, they are stored in the backlog parts staging area.  
When all the parts for the job have arrived, the job will have a “Parts Order Complete” stamped 
either manually or electronically and the job can then be scheduled for the work to be completed, 
generally when the machine is down for a PM Service.  In most instances, there will be more than 
one backlog job. 
 
In most instances, the parts are placed on shelves or in boxes with the work orders. Some mine 
sites will have a box for each machine and identified by plant numbers or serial numbers. Many 
cases, the boxes used are too small even for a minor PM Service. This Best Practice focuses 
specifically on hydraulic mining shovels as it is common to place parts in secondary locations due 
to their size – Introducing the risk for these to get misplaced or missed when the machine is ready 
for service work. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
This Best Practice describes the use of large portable containers for backlog job parts.  These 
containers are typically 600 to 1000 liters in capacity (The ones shown in this document are 
approximately 780 liters.) Dividers can be used when there are multiple jobs for a machine. This 
will help the technicians to easily sort out the required parts for each job. The containers can even 
be purchased with lids for contamination control or with castor wheels for manual handling 
instead of utilizing a fork lift truck. 
 
The containers will be able to be moved with a manual pallet fork or powered fork lift truck.  If 
manual handling is required, they should be fitted with castor wheels.  They can then be easily 
slid out of a row for stocking the parts inside.  When the scheduled machine is ready to be moved 
into the workshop for the jobs to be done, the whole container can be moved to the bay and 
placed next to the machine for unloading the parts. 
 
All backlog jobs are planned, and Maintenance Department will therefore have time to organize 
the parts to be in the bay before the machine arrives.  The size of these containers should 
therefore not be an issue in transferring from the warehouse to the workshop bay.  In fact, the use 
of these containers re-enforces the use of a single trip to the workshop bay. 
 
  

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Backlog Parts Containers for HMS 
DATE 
7/31/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1.06-190320-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures 1 and 2 show two different methods of positioning the containers in a warehouse.  For 
sites with a large fleet, there may be less floor space in the warehouse to have all the containers 
at floor level and may need to be stacked on shelves.  Stacking introduces some issues with the 
requirements of using a fork lift truck every time when parts are needed to be placed in the 
containers on higher levels. 
 
Figure 4 shows a container with castor wheels where it can be manually pushed in and out for 
stocking.  This container also has the option of ventilating holes on the side which may be desired 
for specific purposes.  Please note that the containers shown in figures 1, 2 and 3 do not have 
louvers at the top of the sides.  They are molded corrugations for added strength and rigidity. 
  
Fig. 2: Typical backlog parts containers at 
ground level 
 
 
Fig. 1: Typical backlog parts containers 
stacked up 
 
Fig. 3: Use of manual pallet fork trolley 
 
  
Fig. 4: Container with castor wheels  

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Backlog Parts Containers for HMS 
DATE 
7/31/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1.06-190320-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 4 of 5 
 
Figure 5 shows how parts for multiple jobs can be organized in their own individual boxes 
contained within the container.  This also aids in the workshop when multiple technicians are on 
the job and saves time trying to sort through parts for different jobs.  Figure 6 shows the typical 
containers for smaller traditional machines.  They are useful to the point when some larger parts 
are ordered.  Such larger parts will require a separate location for storage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
a) Review feasibility of using containers of suitable size. 
b) Research on such containers.  A few suggestions to search for: pallet bins, parts 
containers, mega bins, warehouse containers. 
c) Set out area for the parts staging area. 
d) Develop procedure of backlog management process if not already done so.  Refer to 
another Best Practice; Backlog Management 1007-2.0-1103 August 2006. 
e) Review availability of equipment to handle containers of desired size. 
f) Purchase containers and utilize. 
 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
There are multiple benefits when using such containers on site. 
 
a) It will assist in contamination control efforts. 
b) Parts are collated in one container and have less tendencies to be misplaced.  Misplaced 
parts cost time and labor to locate.  In some cases, they must be reordered and it will 
increase downtime of the machine.  If a reordered part does not have immediate delivery, 
the machine may have to return to work with a defect which may fail while in operation. 
  
Fig. 5: Enough room for 1 PM Service and 4 
backlog jobs. 
 
Fig. 6: Typical small containers used for 
smaller traditional machines. 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Backlog Parts Containers for HMS 
DATE 
7/31/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1.06-190320-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 5 of 5 
 
c) It promotes better control of the backlog jobs when the parts are all in one container. 
d) Moving the whole container out to the workshop as a carrier saves time in getting the parts 
to the machine in one single trip. 
e) Technicians get started on the jobs earlier. 
f) Lower machine downtime. 
g) Reduced frustrations of technicians and warehouse personnel. 
h) Professional environment promotes professional work. 
 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
a) Set out appropriate space. 
b) Mark out space with lines. 
c) Handling equipment (manual lift truck, powered lift truck). 
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
None 
 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
• Parts Management Best Practice 
• Backlog Management Best Practice 
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
WesTrac Equipment 
KCGM MARC Team 
Kalgoorlie, Western Australia 
Australia 
 
Written by: 
Victor Lai 
Equipment Management Consultant 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
Lai_victor_k@cat.com
