===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
December 2011 
1112-1.02-1265 
300 Hamilton Blvd., Ste. 300, Peoria, IL 61629-3810, U.S.A.       
 
 
 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Utilization of Existing 
Onboard Electronics 
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics................. 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 6 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 7 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 8 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 8 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 8 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Caterpillar dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or 
warranty about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes 
additional “Best Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 1 of 8 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Electronic Equipment Data is one of the five key Condition Monitoring elements that enable the 
Maintenance and Repair goal of scheduling 80% of maintenance and allowing no more than 20% 
of maintenance to be unscheduled.  Value to the customers can be achieved by establishing 
foundational skills and experience with onboard electronics on existing machines.  When a 
customer’s population of Cat machines with Electronic Control Modules (ECM) reaches a critical 
mass, each customer site could justify the investment in time and resources to capture 
information from those machines.  This Best Practice recommends customer managers already 
have the skills needed to identify instances or trends that require further attention.  This 
recommendation is also an initial step for customers who are acquiring and utilizing more 
advanced technologies.   
 
Product Health is understood as the use of technology to reduce downtime.  After an alarm or 
failure, technology assists in the product health activity of troubleshooting.  However, a potentially 
more significant benefit is the use of technology to pinpoint individual events and/or trends in 
order to proactively perform maintenance and repairs.  Planned service is far less disruptive to 
production and is normally less expensive than post-failure repairs.   
 
Operational data is also collected by the onboard electronics systems on many machines.  At the 
very least, idle hours and fuel consumption are indicators of the work done by each individual 
machine.  Machines equipped with more advanced technologies give insights to payloads, cycle 
times and application severity.   
 
Achieving the lowest cost per ton/m
3/yd3 with Cat machines involves optimization of payload, 
cycle time and availability.  This Best Practice gives equipment managers a chance to listen to 
what their existing Cat machines can tell them as they manage all three elements. 
 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
 
2.1 Basis of the Best Practice 
 
Several policy decisions are required in order for the Caterpillar equipment owner to realize the 
potential value of this Best Practice.  The most crucial policy decision asserts that the Product 
Status Report (PSR) generated by Cat ET contains actionable insights. Additionally, two related 
policy decisions are 1) that the PSR should be downloaded and communicated to the customer’s 
equipment manager 2) as part of their regular Preventive Maintenance (PM) schedule.   
This Best Practice had its origins in a Continuous Improvement (CI) project chartered to establish 
the practicality of these policy decisions. 
 
At a single customer location, the CI project generated PSRs from 15 machines averaging 4.5 
years old and 26,000 service meter hours.  Actionable items included four backlog items for 
product health reasons and two backlog items to re-configure ECM settings to improve 
productivity.  The PSRs identified pre-failure repair opportunities that had not been caught as part 
of the customer’s inspection and PM activities.  In addition, one operator training opportunity was 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 8 
identified and one operational issue was unresolved pending further investigation by the 
customer.  These operational improvements promise to decrease machine cycle times.  The CI 
project demonstrated the value of downloading the PSR.   
 
Regular review of ECM data is practical.  At the site of the CI project, the equipment manager 
would expect about one PSR in the e-mail inbox each day.  Scanning one PSR per day would 
take just moments.  When a PSR identifies an actionable event, the common courses of action 
would be to create a backlog item or to ask the operations supervisor to review the 
circumstances.   
 
This Best Practice concludes that Cat ET downloads can and should be performed by customer 
PM technicians.  At the site of the CI project, a veteran PM technician with minimal PC 
experience performed all 15 downloads in less than one shift.  With only the assistance of the job-
aid, the PM technician was able to perform the process after the first couple of downloads.  It is 
reasonable to expect PM technicians to create and forward Product Status Reports.  While 
troubleshooting failures using Cat ET does require experienced, trained technicians; capturing 
ECM data is a far less complex task. 
 
Once the Best Practice is put into place, the process is short and straightforward.  At specified 
PM intervals, the PM technician connects to the machine with the appropriate Cat ET cable, 
chooses to create the Product Status Report, prints the report to a .pdf file, and e-mails the file to 
the equipment manager and Cat dealer.  When the equipment manager receives the report, 
scanning the diagnostic and event codes identifies any conditions that would either create a 
backlog item or would be passed to the operations management for review.  Depending on the 
customer’s priorities, the equipment manager may also enter readings into a spreadsheet from 
the current totals section of the Product Status Report for one or more ECMs.  This spreadsheet 
would provide trending for operational information like fuel consumption or percentage idle time.  
When the Cat dealer receives the report, they will summarize reports from all machines at the site 
in preparation for review at the quarterly communications meetings with the customer site 
management. 
 
 
2.2 Scheduling the Product Status Report 
 
For customers that perform pre-PM inspections, this task is appropriate within that checklist and 
offers the added benefit of creating backlog items that may be resolved during the downtime 
allocated to the PM.  If pre-PM inspections are not performed, creating and e-mailing this report 
as part of the PM checklist is recommended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 8 
2.3 Job-aid for the Creating the Product Status Report 
 
In the supporting attachments for this Best 
Practice is a document developed to help PM 
technicians gain confidence with the laptop 
computer and the Cat ET software.  The media 
number for ordering this document is PEDJ0122. 
 
The document includes step-by-step instructions 
and including Cat ET screens.   
 
The document is brief and is intended to be used 
by the technician during the PM service. 
 
 
2.4 Equipment Manager Scan of PSRs 
 
Upon receiving the e-mail containing the 
Product Status Report, the customer’s 
equipment manager reviews the codes and 
events for each ECM that exists on this 
particular machine.  Note that when hour 
meter readings are displayed in these 
sections, they are in terms of the individual 
ECM’s diagnostic clock and may vary from 
the machine’s hour meter reading. 
 
The Logged Diagnostic Codes section 
tracks issues where the ECM is reporting 
possible faulty sensors or input to the ECM.  
Backlog items to address these diagnostics 
are recommended.   
 
The Logged Event Codes section tracks any 
number of issues where the component/system managed by the ECM is performing out of 
specifications.  Experienced equipment managers make the decision to whether to create a 
backlog item or to notify operations.   
 
For any one diagnostic code, the PSR displays the diagnostic clock reading at the time of both 
the first and most recent occurrence.  The ECM allocates memory to store up to 127 or 255 
occurrences of any one diagnostic code.  The other stored occurrences are available to the 
technician who would perform repair or troubleshooting services.  
 
The Active Diagnostic Codes section and the Active Event Code section display the same 
information as the logged codes sections for issues that were present when the Product Status 
Report was generated.  The equipment manager’s actions for active codes follow the same 
guidelines as for logged codes. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 8 
2.5 Equipment Manager Trending Process 
 
The Product Status Report also contains 
a section labeled Current Totals for each 
ECM.  The contents of this section vary 
for each component/system managed by 
an ECM.  The example shown is for an 
engine ECM on a Wheel Loader. 
 
The values displayed are for the life of the 
ECM.  For any values that the customer 
determines a trend would be beneficial, it 
is necessary to develop a process for 
recording the information into a separate database each time a Product Status Report is 
generated.  Recommended trending of data from the engine ECM would include Total Fuel, Total 
Idle Time and Total Idle Fuel.  
 
A mock up of spreadsheet is 
shown.  Note, all of the data is 
hypothetical and is not intended 
to serve any purpose other than 
to suggest what an analysis of 
trends might include.   The color 
coding shows what must be 
manually recorded from each 
Product Status Report versus 
the labels and formulas that can 
provide meaning to the analysis.   
 
The anticipated value of this type of tending is to monitor the operations at the customer’s site.  
The equipment manager’s determination of what should be trended is limited only by what is 
available from the ECMs on the Cat machines in their fleet.   
 
 
2.6 Cat Dealer Summary 
 
Forwarding the Product Status Reports to the dealer enables the dealer to generate a high level 
overview for the customer.  Cat Global Mining encourages quarterly communications meetings 
involving customer and dealer leadership to review the all aspects of their relationship, including a 
review of product and product support related issues.  The dealer’s review of the PSR can 
leverage their experience with similar products, similar applications and or leverage their access 
to Caterpillar for solutions and support.  


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 8 
Another Best Practice (Communicating 
VIMS Events Using Critical Event Advice) 
recommends a form for summarizing 
insights from onboard electronics.  The 
benefit of this communication tool is that it 
provides a higher level view of the more 
significant issues that are identified by the 
Product Status Reports.   
 
What this level of summary contributes is 
the ability to determine if an issue needs 
attention beyond the one-at-time backlog 
management approach, since it is 
anticipated that the customer’s equipment 
manager took action on the individual codes 
and events as part of their daily review of 
the PSRs.   
 
These communication meetings help identify those circumstances where closer partnering 
between the customer and the dealer have the ability to lower the cost per ton/m
3/yd3.  The 
Critical Event Advice, or something comparable, is one technique available to improve those 
meetings. 
 
 
2.7   Metrics and Ongoing Process 
 
This best practice does not recommend the creation of a new metric regarding the creation of the 
PSR.  We assume that standard operating procedure utilizes a checklist for each PM service 
interval and that this procedure has the capability of adding the Cat ET Product Status Report 
(PSR) to the checklists. That assumption includes a metric that tracks the completion of the PM 
services and therefore tracks the creation of the PSR. 
 
Backlog items created by the review of the report are also assumed to be tracked by the 
customer as part of the normal backlog process.  A general category of Electronic Equipment 
Data would be recommended if the backlog system tracks the source of the backlog item. 
 
Operational improvements are likely to occur as a result of the review of the reports.  The 
trending spreadsheet suggested in this best practice can be used as both an analysis tool as well 
as a tracking mechanism. 
 
Including the Critical Event Advice in the quarterly meetings is a new source of insight into the 
customer and dealer relationship, but is not what would be considered a metric. 
 
Over time, the advances in technology available to Cat machine owners are expected to surpass 
the actionable insights that this Best Practice recommends.  However the substantial population 
of machines in use today with this level of technology suggests that Cat ET Product Status 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 8 
Reports will be a beneficial component of a comprehensive Condition Monitoring process for 
quite some time. 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
 
3.1 PM Technician 
 
A laptop computer for dedicated use by the PM technicians is recommended.  The customer can 
contact the Cat dealer to acquire and authorize the Cat ET software.  A communications adapter 
cable is necessary to connect the PM technician’s laptop computer to the Cat machines.   
 
The recommended process is to create the Product Status Report on the PM technician’s laptop; 
to print the report to a file in .pdf format; and to e-mail the report to the specified customer and 
dealer personnel.  Software is required to create the .pdf file format.  At the CI project, the 
software CutePDF
TM from ACRO Software Inc. was used. 
 
The recommended process is to store the .pdf format reports in a folder that is convenient for the 
PM technician to access from the e-mail software.  When the PM technician’s laptop computer is 
configured, this folder should be created. 
 
Information for all of these products is included in the Resources Required section of this Best 
Practice. 
 
Customer information technology policies will dictate the e-mail product for use on the PM 
technician’s laptop computer. 
  
 
3.2 Equipment Manager  
 
The equipment manager can perform the reviews of the Product Status Report using commonly 
configured laptop or desktop PCs.  Customer information technology policies will dictate the e-
mail product for use on the equipment manager’s computer as well as the data analysis software 
used for creating the trending spreadsheet.  At the customer site where the CI project occurred, 
common Microsoft Office products were used. 
 
As an alternative to the PM technician creating a .pdf copy of the Product Status Report, Cat ET 
creates a file in proprietary Caterpillar file format every time the report is generated.  This file is 
viewable on any computer with Cat ET installed or can be viewed with a Caterpillar supplied add-
in.  This add-in, distributed as XSLInstaller.exe, is available to dealers on the Caterpillar Intranet.  
Cat ET documentation will identify where this proprietary file is stored on the PM technician’s PC. 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 7 of 8 
3.3 Initializing the Cat Machines 
 
This Best Practice recommends that an experienced technician connect to each Cat machine to 
initialize the header information displayed in the Cat ET Product Status Report.   
 
The recommendation is that the 
Product ID parameter contains the 
serial number for the Caterpillar 
Machine.  The Equipment ID 
parameter is most useful when it 
contains both the customer’s assigned 
unit number and the model of the 
machine.  When this set up step is 
taken, knowing which machine 
generated this report does not rely on 
the PM technician entering accurate 
information when naming the .pdf file. 
 
The team that developed this Best Practice considered, and rejected, clearing of all of the event 
codes in on the ECMs during this initialization process.  The team recommends that the customer 
establish a policy to clear the codes after the cause of the code was identified and corrected. 
 
 
3.4 Training 
 
This best practice recommends training for the PM technicians that focuses on the creation of the 
Product Status Report.  Using the job-aid referenced below, hands-on training by an experienced 
technician should be effective in most situations.  Even though the Resources Required section of 
this Best Practice includes a course number for technician training with Cat ET, that training 
material covers much more than is required for the task at hand. 
 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
This Best Practice is one way to include Electronic Equipment Data in the customer’s Condition 
Monitoring efforts.  The technology required to monitor the machine’s components and systems is 
already on the machines and has been recording data since the machine was new.  The 
incremental cost in time, software and hardware is relatively small, compared to the potential. 
 
As with all elements of Condition Monitoring, this investment only lowers cost per ton/m
3/yd3 
when the information is acted upon.  Disciplined execution of a backlog management process can 
turn information from onboard electronics into higher machine availability, lower operating costs 
and operational improvements.     
 
 
 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Utilization of Existing Onboard Electronics 
DATE 
1/12/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1112-1.02-1265 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 8 of 8 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
NEXG5007 Customer All Product Cat ET 
       or 
NEXG5076 Dealer All Product Cat ET (For Customer use) 
317-7484 Communications Adapter 3 Group 
28657 SCORM DLMS Web based training - Caterpillar Electronic Technician Training 
 
Creating the .pdf version of the Cat ET Product Status Report requires software on the PM 
technician’s laptop computer.  Caterpillar uses CutePDF
TM from ACRO Software Inc. This product 
and the required converter can be downloaded from: 
  http://www.cutepdf.com/products/cutepdf/writer.asp 
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
PEDJ0122  Caterpillar Electronic Technician –  
Product Status Report Job Aid Download Instructions 
 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0608-1.1-1124 – Communicating VIMS Events Using Critical Event Advice 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
Support for the Continuous Improvement project that led to the creation of this best practice came 
from: 
 Dan Dooley 
 Quarry & Aggregates Industry Manager 
 
HOLT CAT 
 daniel.dooley@holtcat.com 
 
For additional information regarding this Best Practice, please contact:  
Virg Cihla or Nick Rummel 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
cihla_virgil_f@cat.com rummel_nicholas_n@cat.com
