===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
 
Managing Fluid Cleanliness ....................................... 1
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 4 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0 Supporting Attachments .................................... 5 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
  
August 2006 
0806-2.10-1000 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction 
 
This Best Practice provides an overview of the importance of maintaining clean fluids and offers 
suggestions on how best to achieve that. Detailed information can be found in the specific Best 
Practice publications cited. 
 
Minimizing machine operating cost is critical to minimizing cost-per-ton. Aside from the cost of 
tires, fuel, and operator, about 70% of total machine operating cost is the life cycle costs of 
machine powertrain components. On a typical large mining truck, the cost distribution is as 
follows: 
 - Engine     40% 
 - Transmission & Torque Converter 10% 
 - Final Drive & Differential   40% 
 - Miscellaneous    10% 
 
Component life cycle cost is roughly defined as cost to rebuild the component divided by actual 
component life in hours. Example: 
($100,000 rebuild cost ÷ 10,000 hour life = $10 hour life cycle cost) 
 
Extending the life of a component is the most important factor in reducing its life cycle cost. This 
does not mean simply extending overhaul intervals and allowing components to wear more 
severely. It means implementing a strategy to reduce the rate of wear and achieve longer 
component life without incurring excessive wear. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
The best way to minimize power train cost per hour is to extend component life and utilize 
the value built into the component.  The most effective way to accomplish this is to operate the 
component with very clean oil throughout its entire life. 
 
Fluid cleanliness management is a strategy to: 
• Remove component and/or system break-in debris as quickly as possible on new and 
rebuilt components. 
• Maintain very clean oil in the component and/or system throughout the entire PM interval 
and entire component life. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
3.1 Dealer & Customer Commitment 
 
3.1.1 Understand the Causes of Component Wear and Failure 
• Reference Improving Component Durability booklets  
(See Section 6.0 Supporting Attachments) 
• Tolerate Early-Hour Filter Plugging 
• Use Off-Board Filtration to Remove Break-In Debris 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
DATE 
8 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1000 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 5 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
3.2 Bulk Fuel Filtration  
 
For a variety of unavoidable reasons, fuel delivered to mine sites is usually contaminated with dirt 
and water. Because fuel is a very low margin commodity, suppliers almost never provide 
adequate bulk fuel filtration or exercise recommended storage practices. As a result, mines 
receive and use contaminated fuel, resulting in premature injector failure and wear out. This 
results in excessive fuel consumption and often results in mid-life injector set replacement. 
 
The fuel filters on the machine are designed to provide final filtration for moderately clean supply 
fuel. Machine filtration is not intended to clean fuel contaminated with large amounts of dirt and 
water. If contaminated fuel is used, the capability of the onboard filtration is overwhelmed and 
injectors either wear out prematurely or seize.  
 
Bulk fuel filtration has been used in the aviation industry for more than 50 years to address the 
same problems. Caterpillar has now adopted this proven technology to help mining customers 
clean contaminated fuel. 
 
Bulk fuel filtration consists of high capacity filters, which remove both excess dirt and water from 
the supply fuel before it is put into the machine.  
Caterpillar has engineered a packaged system to remove both dirt and water. It requires very 
little maintenance and contains safeguards to prevent contaminated fuel from passing through 
the unit. The unit is self-contained on a skid and is located between the fuel storage tank and 
fueling station. It provides single pass filtration, and is offered in four sizes depending on the 
maximum flow rate of the fuel delivery system. 
 
3.3 Bulk Oil Filtration  
A widespread misconception is that new oil is automatically clean because of its appearance. In 
fact, nearly all new oil is contaminated to some degree with dirt, metal particles, plastic, water, or 
other foreign debris. These contaminants are introduced in the transportation and storage 
process from the time the oil leaves the refinery until it is used by the end-user. 
 
Very little new bulk oil meets the recommended Caterpillar cleanliness spec for new oil of 
ISO16/13. This includes oil delivered in bulk tanks, steel barrels, plastic cubes, and small plastic 
containers. 
 
Unfiltered new oil should never be taken directly from the container and placed into the machine. 
This is true whether the oil is being used for refilling a compartment at an oil change interval or 
simply topping off a system.  
 
A variety of bulk oil filtration methods are available and the best one for each situation is dictated 
by factors such as: volume of oil used, location, available infrastructure, and cost. 
 
3.4 Off-Board Machine Fluid Filtration  
Filtration carts can make a major contribution to extending component life. Many mines and 
Caterpillar dealers use filtration carts for the major systems during normal preventive 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
DATE 
8 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1000 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 5 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
maintenance. Carts are connected to major systems (rear axle, transmission, hydraulics, 
steering) and operate unattended while PM services are completed. 
 
3.5 On-Board Machine Fluid Filtration  
The micron rating of filters on many mining machine systems are sized so as not to plug during 
the initial break-in period on new machines. This does not provide optimal filtration capability to 
maintain very high levels of oil cleanliness after the break-in period is complete. 
The most aggressive approach to removing break-in debris as quickly as possible and 
maintaining the highest level of fluid cleanliness is to use Ultra-High Efficiency (UHE) 6-micron 
filters in place of standard filters for all machine systems except the engine. Because these 
filters effectively trap very small particles, some filter plugging will occur during the initial PM 
periods.  
 
3.6 Breather Filters  
Dust entering fluid compartments through inefficient breather filters is often a source of fluid 
contamination. This can be easily prevented with the use of spin-on High Efficiency 4-micron 
fuel filters as breathers for all compartments. When used as fuel tank breathers, HE filters 
have reduced or eliminated premature fuel filter plugging in extremely dusty applications. HE 
fuel filters are also larger than standard breathers and have much greater capacity.  
 
3.7 Measuring Oil Cleanliness  
Component life is maximized when high levels of fluid cleanliness are maintained. The ability 
to effectively and consistently measure debris in fluids is a basic requirement of managing fluid 
cleanliness. Tracking fluid particle data is one way to monitor component health. If a particle 
count raises sharply, an SOS sample can be used to determine the specific wear metal 
showing elevated levels. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Improved Durability 
-Up to 1/3 longer life of powertrain and implement hydraulic components 
-Does not apply to engine due to soot in lube oil. 
 
Improved Reliability 
 -Reduce or eliminate repairs caused by contamination debris.  
 
Improved Parts Reusability 
-Reduced wear rates of internal parts improve reusability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
DATE 
8 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1000 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 5 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
• Bulk Fuel Filter Coalescer 
• Bulk Oil Filtration 
o Permanent filtration installation (or) 
o Portable filtration carts (or) 
o Barrels (or) 
o Cubes (or) 
o On-Machine (or) 
o Off-Board Filtration Carts 
• Portable Particle Counters 
• Particle Count Data Management Software 
• Improving Component Durability Training Booklets 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments  
 
See Component Life Management Strategy Document (Click on Attachments tab within this 
document to view attached file) 
 
Improving Component Durability booklets (see next page) 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
0808-2.10-1006  -Bulk Fuel Filtration 
0808-2.10-1005  -Bulk Oil Filtration 
0808-2.10-1002  -Off-board Fluid Filtration 
0808-2.10-1002  -On-board Fluid Filtration 
0808-2.10-1004  -Breather Filters 
0808-2.10-1001  -Measuring Oil Cleanliness 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Managing Fluid Cleanliness Best Practice was authored by: 
 
Dick Douglas 
Market Consultant 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
Douglas_Richard_D@cat.com  
1-309-675-5699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
DATE 
8 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1000 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 5
