===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
  
August 19 
4.04-171214-01 
  
  
 
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE 
Durability Analysis - Component 
Rebuild Parts Cost 
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
Component Rebuild Parts Cost Analysis ................... 1 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 6 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 6 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 6 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 6 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information pro vided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network.  


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Durability Analysis - Component Rebuild Parts Cost 
DATE 
8/19/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.04-171214-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 6 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Customers in the mining industry focus on lowering  their O&O (Owning and Operating) or TCO 
(Total Cost of Ownership) to maximize profit margin from the commodity they produce. Often when 
selecting equipment, one of the key criteria is lowest TCO for that class of equipment . Dealers 
would often develop the TCO estimation by  ‘localized’ Caterpillar Global LCC (Life Cycle Cost) 
Centreline files based on customer’s specific application needs. The Global Centreline files were 
developed during the NPI process when the model was r eleased. Depending on the application 
and site maintenance strategy, the estimated component lives in the files might not line up with the 
actual components hours achieved in the field. The actual hours achieved by the components might 
deviate from target life estimated by the original localized file and at the same time well outside of 
the warranty period  so customers would usually treat  them as early PCR (Planned Com ponent 
Replacement). When the rebuilder (Dealer CRC or 3 rd Party) receives the component for rebuild, 
SIMS tickets might not be submitted. Hence, Caterpillar is not made aware of the life limiting part(s) 
for component(s). The purpose of this Best Practice is to demonstrate how Dealers can conduct 
piece parts consumption during rebuild and compare that against the localized builder file. Through 
the analysis, dealer can identify the piece parts that contribute to TCO misalignment  and take 
appropriate actions accordingly. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
The objectives of this Best Practice are:  
• Conduct component rebuild parts cost analysis and its impact to TCO  
• Provide feedback loop on component actual achieved life vs. estimated component life for 
Global LCC Centreline 
• Provide feedback loop on component actual achieved life vs. estimated component life for 
Dealer ‘localized’ LCC Centreline 
• Comparison of actual rebuild costs vs. estimated rebuild cost 
• Identify misaligned parts consumption during PCR and initiate further investigation 
 
This document provides process guidelines to establish a framework that allow the review of 
parts costs during each individual rebuild done by Dealers’ Component Rebuild Centers.  
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
• Capture Parts Consumption Data for Every Rebuild Work Order - The following data 
would need to be captured for every component rebuild by the Dealer Component Rebuild 
Center 
o Invoice/service call number 
o Part numbers and Group number – the part number and group number needs to be 
captured because there are some parts can be used on different components and 
different machines. Using both part number and group number to identify a part will 
provide the part with unique identity. 
o Parts quantity 
o Component number 
o Serial number  
o Component life achieved 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Durability Analysis - Component Rebuild Parts Cost 
DATE 
8/19/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.04-171214-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 6 
 
• Construction of Component Analysis – Dealers can conduct the analysis based on their 
business operation system and resource available to them. The steps below were based on 
using MS Excel as analysis tool and manual entering each analysis.  
 
o Identify Relevant Piece Parts within Rebuild Component - Obtain the electronics 
Parts Manual for the model to be analyzed. Filter out the piece parts related to the 
component being rebuild and analyzed. There two different ways to filter piece parts 
that belong to a component.  
▪ Components that do not have a unique serial number prefix such as differential 
and wheel ends on LMT. The analyst will need to identify all the parent/group 
number up to the piece part level in the component 
▪ Components that do have a unique serial number prefix such as engine and 
transmission on LMT, the analyst can filter it down by their respective serial 
number prefix from the parts manual 
 
o Consideration for Machine Serial Number Break – The parts consist can be filtered 
into different machine serial number breaks. It is important ensure the machine serial 
number break are selected with the corresponding machine serial number being 
analyzed 
 
o Consideration for Part Number Change – As improvements are made to the 
machine, new part numbers would be assigned to reflect the improvement. To take this 
into consideration, the analysis must include part number replacement dataset from the 
Dealer Parts System. It is a snapshot in time that shows prior, current and future piece 
part number at the time the file is obtained. The file can be sourced from Caterpillar 
Numerical Parts Record (NPR) 
 
o Consideration for Part Numbers within Kits – Kits are often used in rebuilds. The 
part numbers within a kit must be broken down to understand the piece parts 
consumption in rebuilds 
 
o Create Component Consist for a Particular Machine Serial Number – Once the 
above steps are completed, you would end up with the component parts consist that is 
reflective of a particular machine serial number. 
 
o Obtain Component Rebuild Consist – In this step you will need to obtain the actual 
rebuild consist that composed of the parts consumed for the rebuild for the same serial 
number as the prior step  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Durability Analysis - Component Rebuild Parts Cost 
DATE 
8/19/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.04-171214-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 4 of 6 
o Conduct Component Analysis – To conduct the component analysis, you will need to 
merge the data in the Component Consist with the Rebuild Consist in the following 
additional columns. If you are using MS Excel, merging the two consists would involve 
using of the Vlookup function.  
▪ Alternative Part Number   
▪ Previous Part Number  
▪ Replacing Part Number  
▪ Part Number Purchased in a Kit 
▪ Work Order Quantity – This is the average quantity of a particular part number 
replaced per rebuild work order 
▪ Work Order Average Replacement % - This is the work order quantity divide by 
the quantity needed in the component.  
▪ Dealer Standard Job Replacement % – Dealer would use the standard job 
replacement % to estimate and quote the rebuild job 
▪ Builder file replacement % - This information can be extracted from the Builder 
file 
▪ Delta % – This delta is the % difference between work order average 
replacement % vs. Builder file replacement %. 
▪ Dealer Net (D/N) Cost  
▪ Actual Cost – The product of D/N cost, Quantity and Work Order Average 
Replacement % 
▪ Builder Cost - The product of D/N cost, Quantity and Builder File Replacement 
% 
▪ Delta Cost – This delta is the cost difference between Actual Cost vs. Builder 
Cost 
 
The table below is a simplified example of the above implementation steps 
 
 
Case 1 – The rebuild used less quantity of 111-1111 than Builder File's estimate. This is 
a favorable position for part number 111-1111. The localized Builder File can be 
adjusted for this part number. Lowering the cost of the rebuild would lower the TCO 
 
Case 2 – Actual replacement rate of 222-2222 match with Builder File’s estimate. 
Dealer can continue to use the Builder File replacement % in forecasting TCO 
 
Case 3 – The rebuild used more quantity of 333-3333 than Builder File's estimate. This 
is not a favorable position for the part number as the actual repair consumed 60% more 
in quantity for this particular part number. This contributes $60 more towards the TCO.  
 
 
Case Component # Part # Quantity
Average Work 
Order Qty
Work order 
Average 
Replacement 
%
Builder File 
Replacement 
% Delta % D/N
Actual 
Cost
Builder 
Cost
Delta 
Cost
1 1111 111-1111 2 1 50% 100% 50%  $       20  $       20  $       40  $       20 
2 1111 222-2222 10 5 50% 50% 0%  $       10  $       50  $       50  $        -   
3 1111 333-3333 5 4 80% 20% -60%  $       20  $       80  $       20 -$       60 
 $     150  $     110 -$       40 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Durability Analysis - Component Rebuild Parts Cost 
DATE 
8/19/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.04-171214-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 5 of 6 
The variance warrants further investigation and here are the areas to review: 
 
- Confirm reusability guideline compliance during the rebuild process 
- Customer’s operational and maintenance strategy could influence the reusability 
of certain part numbers. For example: higher than usual engine speed 
distribution can reduce the reusability of certain part numbers in components 
- Product Support Program is a mean for Caterpillar to address product issues in 
the field by providing commercial support to the customers. If the parts are 
replaced under such programs at rebuild then customer do not bear the cost. 
Hence it has a limited impact to the TCO and should be excluded from the 
analysis 
- When parts did not meet the reusability guideline and needed to be replaced at 
PCR, and these parts were not forecasted by the Builder File then SIMS tickets 
should be raised to inform Caterpillar of the higher than usually parts 
consumption and Caterpillar can address it through the CPI process. However, 
sometimes SIMS tickets might not be raised at the time of component rebuild and 
hence the parts consumption analysis is another mean to identify the 
discrepancy. 
- Furthermore, it is recommended Dealers’ CRC to be involved to provide failed 
iron of the parts in question for further analysis and provide background why they 
were replaced 
 
o Accumulate Sufficient Samples and Repeat the Analysis – To have reliable and 
representative data, a sufficient number of samples must be collected. The Dealer that 
assisted with the development of this Best Practice have over 100 rebuilds for certain 
LMT components.  
 
o Bottom-up approach vs. Top-down approach – The example above is a bottom-up 
approach whereby the analysis was done on an individual truck basis and then the data 
will be consolidated in an aggregate format. The advantage of this method is that it 
allows the analyst to drill down into individual truck level. However, as the machine 
population increases, the method might be time consuming to complete. An alternate 
method is to the top-down approach, whereby Dealers collect component rebuilds 
information for a large population and conduct the analysis in a macro level. The 
average replacement rate for a part piece is calculated based on the total number of 
the piece parts replaced divided the machine population. While this method is time 
efficient, it could overlook the effect of consist difference and serial number break. But 
based on previous experience the difference between to two methods would be within 
5%, which is considered acceptable as we are trying to identify the variance of over 
20% in the component analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Durability Analysis - Component Rebuild Parts Cost 
DATE 
8/19/2019 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.04-171214-01 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 6 of 6 
4.0 Benefits 
 
The benefits of the component analysis, particularly for mining machines, are:  
• Understand impact of certain higher than usual part consumptions at rebuild have on the 
TCO and how TCO can be optimized 
• Optimize parts consumption for rebuild and improve competitiveness in the rebuild market 
• Enable further investigation into the root cause of the parts consumption variance between 
Builder File Estimate vs. Actual Parts Consumption for rebuild 
• Provide feedback to Product Groups to initiate CPI projects to address certain part 
number(s) consumption that drive up TCO 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Management time to collect data, analyze, and review finding 
• MS Excel or other analysis tool 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
N/A 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0608-4.3-1122 Forecasting CRC Component Rebuild Volume and Capacity 
0907-3.3-1086 Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Development 
0307-4.5-1068 Failure Analysis Process  
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was developed based on the data captured by Hastings Deering. For further 
information, please contact:  
 
Doug Eady 
Hastings Deering (Australia) Limited 
Lifecycle Management Service Manager 
Doug.Eady@hastingsdeering.com.au  
+617 3365 9522 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Rex Cheung 
Caterpillar of Australia Ltd. Pty. 
Service Technical Representative 
Cheung_Rex@cat.com
