===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
March 2007  
0307-4.01-1072  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Cost Effective Gasket and Paint 
Cleaning Processes 
 
Application  Maintenance  Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management  
Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
 
Cost Effective Gasket and Paint Cleaning Processes 1
 
1.0  Introduction ....................................................... 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 5 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 6 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 6 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat ® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
bout the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHO UT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Cost Effective Paint & Gasket Removal Processes 
DATE 
22 MAR 07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0307-4.01-1072  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 6 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Efficient parts cleaning processes are critical to several facets of CRC operations.  Parts cleaning 
may be considered a non-value adding step, but it represents a substantial portion of labor and 
expenses in the rebuilding process.  The cleaning step is an important segment in the critical 
path, since the last parts disassembled are the first parts needed in assembly.  All other parts 
must wait in staging until those critical few are cleaned, rebuilt, and cleaned again before the 
component is ready for assembly. 
 
There are many technologies used in the cleaning process, such as high-pressure cabinet 
washers, buffing, grinding, blast cleaning, and solvent washing.  Ideally, the fastest and least 
costly process is applied to each part as needed.  Automatic cleaning is typically preferred for 
cost control and consistent quality.  Gasket removal and seal surface cleaning is difficult because 
it often requires extensive manual labor.  Paint removal is difficult because: 
• Ferrous metals require a caustic solution to remov e most paints.  This is expensive to buy, 
and the remaining wastes are expensive to dispose of. 
• Non-ferrous metals require very high cost chemical s to strip paint, and these are also very 
expensive to dispose of in many regions. 
 
This Best Practice will discuss paint and gasket removal without requiring such expensive 
chemical processes. The processes employed will provide a sufficient level of cleanliness without 
“over-cleaning.” These new processes will also minimize part damage and processing time/labor. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Parts cleaning is often performed by lesser-skilled employees – those with the least experience in 
the dealer and/or product.  They are typically trained by outgoing personnel from that area, and 
receive little follow-up unless the rebuild technicians complain about dirty parts. Some rebuild 
centers will also require technicians to clean parts, with each tech being responsible for his or her 
own parts.  Cleaners typically: 
• Grind and scrape all the gaskets off before the ca binet washing. This removal requires 
time, labor, and effort making the parts more vulnerable to damage and reducing the 
effectiveness of gaskets and seals.  Excess grinding and scraping also creates airborne 
debris that will spread into the shop and require additional cleanup. 
• Grind/scrape all the gaskets off after the cabinet  washing, typically long after the parts have 
cooled and gaskets have hardened, again using lots of time.  This excess grinding and 
scraping creates the same problems mentioned above.  In addition, abrasives and debris 
can contaminate the parts and become incorporated into the rebuilt component, and affect 
service life. 
• Use several methods to remove paint: blast cleanin g requires time and facility resources.  
Grinding/buffing to remove all the paint also requires significant time and labor and spreads 
airborne debris.  Chemical removal consumes caustic, or more expensive chemicals, which 
add excessive disposal costs to direct expenses.  Some operations don’t clean paint 
beyond the aluminum-safe solution washes.  This omission leaves curled paint surfaces on 
the parts, which: 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHO UT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Cost Effective Paint & Gasket Removal Processes 
DATE 
22 MAR 07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0307-4.01-1072  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 6 
 
 
 
o Creates an inferior painting 
surface, resulting in a low-quality 
product image to the customer. 
o Causes paint chips to re-enter the 
assembly process; contaminating 
bearing surfaces and blocking 
lubrication passages. Results can 
reduce service life or possibly 
cause early failure. 
o Creates a mess in the work bays, 
with paint chips breaking off the 
parts and flying around the shop.  
This adds to shop cleaning efforts 
and demonstrates an 
unprofessional image to 
employees and the customer. 
 
Effective gasket and paint cleaning processes 
provide balance towards getting parts cleaned to 
a consistent quality and minimizing the time, 
labor, and supplies to perform the cleaning.  This 
process follows: 
• Gaskets/sealants that soften during the 
cabinet washer cycle should be quickly 
scraped off with a putty knife immediately 
after the wash cycle.  The parts should 
still be hot and the gaskets should be 
easy to scrape off quickly.  Many of the 
gaskets may have already fallen off the 
parts during the wash cycle. 
• Gaskets that were not softened and 
subsequently difficult to remove after the 
wash cycle, should be scraped or ground 
off before the second wash cycle.  This 
will minimize post-wash grinding and 
further wash cycles.  This is commonly 
required with gaskets exposed to high 
heat or those applied with aggressive 
sealing chemicals. This is common with 
exhaust gasket and head gasket areas – 
those exposed to high combustion heat. 
 
 
 
Disassemble 
Will gasket 
material be 
loosened by 
washer?
Buff gasket seal 
surfaces 
Will gasket 
seal surface 
be cleaned by 
washer?
N
N
High pressure 
cabinet wash 
Immediately 
inspect washed 
parts (while hot)
Soft gaskets 
still on 
parts?
Hand scrape 
gaskets (putty 
knife)
Stage/inspect 
parts N
Y
Paint & Gasket Removal Process 
(Best Practice scope in green box)  

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHO UT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Cost Effective Paint & Gasket Removal Processes 
DATE 
22 MAR 07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0307-4.01-1072  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 6 
• Once processed by the cabinet washer, painted part s may be: 
o “Buffed” with a powered bench-mounted, or hand-hel d angle grinder.  Although 
rust/corrosion should be completely removed, only the paint chips need be removed 
up to the point of where the paint remains adheres to the part.  The sharp broken 
paint edge on the part should only be “feathered” to blend it into the part surface.  
The blend-line should disappear under a good coat of paint. 
o Blast cleaned with a automatic tumbling cleaner  
• Blast clean aggressive corrosion only as needed.  This may be performed manually, 
especially for larger/sensitive parts, or with an automatic tumbling blaster, for other parts.  
Blast only critical areas and blast to “feather” out paint to minimize time, labor, and supply 
expense.  Always wash parts after blast cleaning due to the amount of abrasive carry-over. 
 
Establish consistent and cost-effective cleaning processes: 
• Perform cleaning only with specialized cleaning em ployees.  Do not permit rebuild 
technician to share in the general cleaning area duties as a rule.  Rebuild technicians may 
only clean in the general cleaning area only under special circumstances and to expedite 
a repair. 
• Establish a training process or course to prepare the cleaning specialist. Include best-in-
class visual aids and physical samples. Implement the training consistently with 
demonstrated qualification standards. Emphasize quality and cost effectiveness. Review 
performance periodically to assure quality does not drift and process improvements are 
documented/replicated. 
• Establish cleaning equipment maintenance programs for consistent operations.  Include 
schedules, checklists, and reliable supply delivery/inventory systems.  Define individual 
responsibilities for equipment operators and maintainers.  Enforce daily/consistently. 
• Lead cleaners and disassembly technicians as a tea m to capitalize on the location, and 
opportunities to share employees between functional areas. This also allows for better 
parts reuse and applied failure analysis process control.  Parts often must be cleaned for 
better reuse and AFA decisions, and a team can coordinate these processes with the 
least effort/ bureaucracy. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1. Document as-is cleaning processes, equipment, an d performance. 
a. Develop practical performance metrics. 
b. Document subjective observations through definit ions and visual aids. 
c. Account for employee experience and strategy in applying employees to function. 
d. Include area equipment maintenance programs, rol es/responsibilities, and adherence. 
2. Define future cleaning strategy based on expecte d product type, volume, size, etc. 
a. Plan for typical rebuild volumes as well as expe cted peak production business cycles. 
b. Investigate specialized cleaning facilities, equ ipment, tools and processes. 
c. Utilize Cat Facility Development and Service Too ls Development. 
d. Visit best-in-class dealers to observe their ope rations. 
3. Apply future strategy to shop layout plans. 
a. Consider staging location’s effects on product p rotection and flow. 
b. Add changes to shop layout drawing. 
c. Include shop technician teams in the review/appl ication stages. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHO UT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Cost Effective Paint & Gasket Removal Processes 
DATE 
22 MAR 07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0307-4.01-1072  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 6 
d. Include outside groups providing facility/equipm ent support functions, as needed. 
e. Use Cat Facility Development and Service Tools D evelopment expertise as required. 
4. Develop/document the new cleaning (and disassemb ly – as needed) strategy/procedure, with 
new roles and responsibilities. 
5. Establish facility/equipment maintenance strateg ies as needed. 
6. Establish adjusted repair/rebuild time requireme nt targets as needed. 
7. Establish adjusted cleaning (and disassembly) gr oup leadership as needed. 
8. Present strategy to shop employees. 
9. Implement the staging processes, layout, and equ ipment changes into the shop. 
a. This may occur in phases (as needed). 
b. Test new processes to establish “best-fit” appli cation for shop. 
10. Train employees to use the new procedures.  Follow-up/enforce immediately. 
11. Review process and support system performance once established. 
12. Establish and implement adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Increased capacity - These concepts increased clea ning stage throughput for a given amount 
of labor hours, by specializing and effectively training the employees.  Supply 
control/availability minimizes production delays. 
• Reduced cost – Labor hour targets per cleaning seg ment were reduced as mentioned above.  
“Over-cleaning” was almost eliminated and consistently controlled with periodic process 
review.  Equipment is better maintained with consistent cleaners and comprehensive 
maintenance support.  Supply control minimizes production interruptions.  
• Increased quality – Reduced over-cleaning allowed time for focusing on the tough cleaning 
areas, and consistent cleaning methods increased the skills applied to those areas. 
• Improved image – Effective processes and employees  in the cleaning area promote a higher 
level of professionalism with the employees.  A cleaner environment also promotes employee 
professionalism and this was immediately obvious to all customers visiting the CRC.  They 
turned a typically “dirty corner” into a productive working area. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
• Investment costs vary, depending on cleaning area/ system related gaps found and local 
labor/material costs: 
o Equipment upgrades to provide product quality/cons istency. 
o Facility upgrades to provide effective product flo w to match new processes. 
o System development to assure facility/equipment re liability. 
• Support Equipment – as needed: 
o Equipment organization aids (racks, cabinets). 
o Airborne debris containment (downdraft tables, eva cuation systems, etc.). 
o Utility reels for effective facility cleaning effo rts. 
o Automatic cleaning equipment (tumbling blasters, c abinet washers, etc.). 
• People 
o Establish current cleaning, quality, costs, and en vironmental concerns with team. 
o Establish process, facility, and equipment improve ments through team. 
o Establish team organization/leadership to coordina te/support contingent functions. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHO UT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Cost Effective Paint & Gasket Removal Processes 
DATE 
22 MAR 07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0307-4.01-1072  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 6 
• Training 
o Establish the improvement benefits with the produc tion team. 
o Define and enforce the new process and duties with  the production team. 
o Define and enforce new support systems/process/dut ies with support teams. 
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
None. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0107-4.5-1060  -CRC Parts Buffer Enhancement 
0207-4.5-1063  -CRC Material Transport Strategy 
0107-4.4-1061  -CRC Parts Blasting Enhancement 
0207-4.4-1066 
  -CRC Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working En vironment 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt
