===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
May 21 
4.03-210531-1 
300 Hamilton Blvd., Ste. 300, Peoria, IL 61629-3810, U.S.A.     
 Mining.cat.com 
 Caterpillar: Confidential Green 
 
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE 
Workshop Daily Planning 
Board 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
Workshop Daily Planning Board ………………………0 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description .................................. 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 3 
4.0 Benefits ............................................................. 4 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 4 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0 Acknowledgements ........................................... 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat
® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Workshop Planning Daily Board 
DATE 
5/31/2021 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.03-210531-1 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 1 of 4 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Borusan Makina Kazakhstan’s Component Rebuild Shop (CRS) has implemented a daily planning 
board to efficiently follow up its daily operations.  
Due to this  board, the workshop supervisor and service engineers can visually see the current 
volume of work in the workshop. In addition, the board allows  the work-in-process starting from 
Awaiting Disassembly to Component ready to dispatch to be observed. 
 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
There are several participants in the component repair process. There is a Shop supervisor, Team 
leader, Planning Engineer, Spare Parts specialist, and Machine Shop Engineer. Due to the large 
number of participates in the repair process, important information has the potential to be lost during 
communication. It influenc es the turnaround time of the repaired components. The components 
that were not ready by the planned time may  cause complaints from the customers. Besides, the 
planning accuracy of the shop was far from the target. That is why an idea to represent visually the 
work-in-process (WIP) of the shop has been implemented.  
The board structure is quite simple. It consists of Engine and PT work orders, which go through the 
repair process on the board. At our dealership, the planning engineer is responsible for constantly 
updating the workflow board.  
 
Clarifications to the Board: 
 
• Awaiting Disassembly – the work orders awaiting disassembly are put on this section; 
• Disassembly – the work orders being disassembled are put on this section; 
• Defect list preparation – the work orders for which defect lists are prepared; 
• Technical Report preparation – the work orders for which technical reports are prepared; 
• Awaiting Defect li st from MS (Machine Shop)  – when we are awaiting information on 
salvage work. 
• Awaiting answer from CAT – when we need information on components from the CAT.  
• Awaiting repair – the work orders approved by Customers and put on the plan are shown 
here, but the shop have not touched them yet due to several reasons (dates of spare parts 
arrival and MS salvage are not known or their dates are known but it will take long time until 
the spare parts come and salvage work is done). 
• Awaiting spare parts – the work orders awaiting spare parts are shown on this section. MS 
salvage is finished; 
• Awaiting salvage – the work orders with 100% of spare parts awaiting salvage are shown 
here. Usually salvage goes parallel with awaiting spare parts, but sometimes salvage is done 
after all spare parts are delivered. In this case we have to wait until salvage is finished and 
after that assemble the component; 
• Awaiting spare Parts, partial assembly – the work orders where we can start assembling 
subcomponents of the component until we are waiting for the rest spare parts. 
• Awaiting Assembly – the work orders with 100% of spare parts but cannot be assembled 
due to the lack of people or spare bays; 
Assembly – the work orders being assembled are put on this section. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Workshop Planning Daily Board 
DATE 
5/31/2021 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.03-210531-1 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 4 
• Awaiting Test – the work orders assembled but cannot be tested due to the lack of people 
or spare bays; 
Test – the work orders being tested are put on this section. 
Additional awaiting – the work orders that are finished but cannot be dispatched. For 
example, the finished torque converter is awaiting the completion of the engine overhaul. As 
soon as the engine is finished, they will be connected and then dispatched to the Customer. 
• COMPLETED (components are ready) – the work orders finished are shown here; 
• COMPLETED Defect list and Technical report are sent to be quoted)  – the work orders on 
which defect lists and technical reports have been prepared and sent to be quoted, and now 
they are waiting for Customer’s approval. 
 
Picture 1. Our Workshop Daily Planning Board structure 
 
Clarifications to the magnetic stripe template that is used in the Board: 
 
• Work Order No. – the work order number is written here; 
• Customer Name – the customer name is written here; 
• Model – the engine or machine model is written here; 
• Component – the component name is written here; 
• Spare Parts, Start Assy Date – the date of component assembly starting is written here; 
• Last Spare Part Coming Date – the date when the last spare part will come is written here; 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Workshop Planning Daily Board 
DATE 
5/31/2021 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.03-210531-1 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 4 
• MS, Start Salvage Date – the date when the Machine Shop is planning to start salvaging of 
parts; 
• MS, Last Part Date – the date when the last salvaged part comes from the Machine Shop 
is written here; 
• PTD Plan Date –  the date when the Planning- and-Technical Department puts this work 
order in the plan, by this date the Component Rebuild Shop (CRS) must finish the work order 
(component); 
• CRS Plan Date – the date when the CRS is planning to finish this work order (component) 
as per its availability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 2. Our magnetic stripe template (for the Board) 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
In order to implement the Workshop Daily Planning Board in daily operations: 
 
1) Purchase the equipment required (metallic board, magnetic stripes, markers); 
2) Think over what information will be on a magnetic stripe and order the quantity you required; 
3) Transfer the repair process and downtime into the board (awaiting disassembly, disassembly, 
awaiting parts, etc.); 
4) Start using the board for your daily WIP components. For example, we (Shop supervisor, Team 
leader, Planning Engineer, Spare Parts specialist, and Machine Shop Engineer ) makes 
meetings beside this Board 3 times a week and discuss the current status, plans, concerns, etc. 
This Board visually helps to see the WIP and not to miss anything during the repair process. 
 
See below the photo of Workshop Daily Planning Board implemented in our daily operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 3. Our Workshop Daily Planning Board in use 


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Workshop Planning Daily Board 
DATE 
5/31/2021 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
4.03-210531-1 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 4 of 4 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Visual representation of WIP components on a daily base; 
• Easy to use and follow up WIP components; 
• Improved planning of work-in-process components; 
• Improved communication between shops and related departments;  
• Correct components repair history data; 
• Increased Customers’ loyalty to the CRC. 
 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• 3-meter metallic board;  
• Magnetic stripes with the information needed to stick on the board; 
• Markers (that can be erased from the magnetic stripe when the work order is finished). 
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
N/a. 
 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
N/a. 
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
The idea of creating & implementing this Best Practice belongs to: 
 
Andrey UMAROV          
CRS Supervisor           
Component Rebuild Shop (CRS)    
Borusan Makina Kazakhstan LLP         
 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
Gulnaz MANSUROVA 
CRC Quality Engineer 
Borusan Makina Kazakhstan LLP 
gmansurova@borusan.com 
+7 (701) 951 98 14
