===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
CRC Investment Analysis 
Process – Measuring 
Return on Investment 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
CRC Investment Analysis .......................................... 0
 
Process – Measuring Return on Investment .............. 0 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 3 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 3 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 3 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 3 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
September 2006 
0906-4.5-1013 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Most dealerships require a formal return on investment analysis be performed to measure the 
expected return on any proposed significant investment. This process is necessary to assure that 
company funds are used wisely and create a satisfactory return on the investment. 
 
It is important, especially in the case of investments made in the Component Rebuild Center 
(CRC) or other service area, to be sure that the full impact of the investment is properly measured 
and analyzed. Important benefits of service shop investments are easily overlooked and thus 
decisions are sometimes made on incomplete data. 
 
This Best Practice compiles a list of potential benefits to consider when evaluating a CRC 
investment. The ideas have been combined from the practices of several dealerships. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
CRC Investments are typically made to achieve a performance result leading to a profit 
improvement. Here are the most common reasons for shop investments: 
 
• Improved Labor Efficiency. This is a process change to reduce the labor required to 
perform a service. It is important to recognize that a labor efficiency improvement also has 
impact on profit margins, shop capacity, and work order turnaround time (velocity). An 
example of this type of investment is tooling improvements, which reduce the time a 
mechanic takes to perform a task. 
• Improved Rebuild Quality. A rebuild quality improvement lowers warranty costs and 
creates a cost-avoidance benefit. If a dealer has MARC contracts, a quality improvement 
also increases rebuild reliability and component life. Component life improvement reduces 
cost per hour and can mean substantial financial benefit. A good example is 
testing/inspection equipment or contamination control equipment. 
• Cost Reduction. This is an improved process or technology that lowers shop operating 
costs.  
• Revenue Creation. Investments made to increase sales.  
• Add Capability. An investment made to provide a service or shop support capability not 
currently available. This can create new revenue or lower cost. A good example is 
investing in spray weld or machine shop technology. 
• Increase Capacity. Such investments improve processes and efficiency, resulting in lower 
work order turnaround time. Examples include adding additional facility space or 
technicians. 
• Support Marketing. Service capability is often important in supporting the marketing 
efforts of new machine sales, parts sales, MARC contracts, etc. 
• Enhance Image. An investment to improve both internal and external image. Internal 
image is an environment that serves to motivate technicians/ staff towards higher 
performance at many levels, while external image projects quality and professionalism to 
the customer. 
 
Many of the above improvements (investments) result in a direct, or indirect, financial benefit. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Investment Analysis Process - Measuring Return 
on Investment 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1054 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 1 of 3 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
The typical investment analysis is a basic cash flow forecast.  It may or may not capture the full 
impact of an investment on the bottom line.  It is important that any investment under 
consideration be fully explored to capture both the obvious and the “hidden” value. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
The following is a collection of investment analysis process “tips” successfully used by a number 
of dealers. 
 
• Flat rates are vital. It is critical to apply flat rated standard segments, at least for the 
labor portion, to all work orders. For example, a certain repair may require10 hours 
labor to perform. Tooling improvements may allow the job to be performed in eight 
hours labor in the future. If the charge to the customer is reduced to eight hours, you 
actually end up selling fewer hours and will never pay for the tooling. If you charge the 
10-hour flat rate and do the work in eight hours, you have significantly increased the 
profit margin on the job. 
Note: You may also be able to build a financial case for charging only the 8 hours if this 
lower price to your customers creates more business and you can sell the 2 hours that 
you saved on another job. 
• CRC or shop investments may be assessed at the shop and/or the enterprise 
impact level. Labor revenue alone may not be sufficient to justify a significant 
investment, but there may be influence on parts sales as well as machine sales. A poor 
investment from the shop perspective may be a good investment from the company 
perspective. 
• Be very thorough with capturing the benefits of efficiency improvements. Labor 
efficiency improvements have a compounded impact on profits. In the above-mentioned 
example of a 10-hour job, you invest in tooling to do the job in 8 hours and charge a flat 
rate equal to 10 hours. The 2 hours that you saved becomes pure profit at your full 
selling rate and substantially changes your profit margin for that job. Be sure that your 
investment analysis spreadsheet reflects the higher margin. Now, the 2 hours saved 
effectively increase your shop capacity and can be sold on other jobs. This additional 
revenue should also be captured in your analysis. 
• Measure cost-avoidance benefits. Reduced costs and cost avoidance goes directly to 
your bottom line as increased profit. Cost avoidances are hard to capture, but are very 
real. Improved quality lowers warranty costs and increases average component life. 
Lower warranty cost improves your profits, and if you have CSAs, better average 
component life reduces your contract expenses.  
• Utilization of assets benefit. Better use of assets can be a major benefit. If you 
improve efficiencies and processes to reduce component turnaround time, you have 
added capacity to your shop using the same resources. This enables your shop to 
handle more workload. One dealer cancelled plans for a $1.5 million dollar shop 
expansion when they were able to improve shop turnaround time 25%. The capacity 
improvement made the investment unnecessary at present and forecast workloads. 
Another dealer reduced their major component exchange inventory by several million 
dollars due to improved component rebuild turnaround time in the shop. The exchange 
components were to support a fleet of 793’s. Better utilization of assets represents a 
benefit that needs to be part of your analysis. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Investment Analysis Process - Measuring Return 
on Investment 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1054 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• Future machine population. Most investment analysis spreadsheets look at a 10-year 
return on investment. Looking out ten years, your analysis should reflect shop business 
volume considering present and forecast machine populations.  
 
Improvement investments should always be carefully considered. Cash flow forecasts typically 
have assumptions built into the calculations such as margins, volume of sales, etc. When 
investment impacts efficiency, capacity, turnaround time, quality, cost reductions, or any other 
etc, it is important to ensure that the financial forecast, used to calculate return on investment, 
reflects the improvement created by the investment. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Investment analysis is performed capturing all costs and benefits. 
• Shop as well as enterprise impact is considered. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
 N/A 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
N/A 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
Improving CRC Rebuild Turnaround Time  0906-4.5-1013 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Dale Bream 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
Global Mining Product Support 
brehm_dale_e@cat.com 
309 –675-6325 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Investment Analysis Process - Measuring Return 
on Investment 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1054 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 3
