===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
November 2006  
1106-4.4-1038  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
In-Process Staging 
Strategy 
 
Application  Maintenance  Site 
Management  
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management  
 
 
 
 
In-Process Staging Strategy ...................................... 1
 
1.0  Introduction ....................................................... 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 4 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 5 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 6 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER :  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat ® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
In-Process Staging Strategy 
DATE 
11/28/06 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
1106-4.4-1038 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 6 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Component Rebuild Center (CRC) parts and component staging is critical to several facets of 
CRC operations.  Staging is non-value adding and is typically unplanned or not maintained.  
Rebuild product should be staged between processing steps in a manner that consumes minimal 
resources (space, labor, equipment).  Staging begins with major component receipt and ends 
with major component release to the customer, parts department, etc. Effective part/component 
staging reduces staging space requirements and technician rebuild labor with simpler storage 
equipment and product accessibility. 
 
An effective staging strategy enables consistency and minimizes “lost” in-process product. Last-
minute customer changes are less costly to re-schedule due to greater process flexibility. 
Properly used, an enhanced staging strategy provides increased capacity, efficient parts flow, 
and better space utilization. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
For the scope of this Best Practice, parts/components staging begins after the major component is 
processed in the general disassembly/cleaning area(s).   
 
• Current practice is typically ineffective and inco nsistent. 
o Once cleaned the product often stays in the cleani ng area, (or wherever there is space) 
until it is sent to one of several component rebuild areas (CRA).  The CRA may be 
specific to shafts, pumps & drives, front/rear covers, turbochargers, fuel systems, etc. 
o Once the CRA has completed processing the product it may be sent to wait in the 
general assembly bay until all of the parts/components are available for the assembly 
process. 
o Parts/components are often in one of several place s, depending on who processed 
them and where the shop has space to park them.  They may end up in an aisle traffic 
lane, close to a shop access door, or in any number of open places vulnerable to dirt, 
debris, water, and contact damage. 
 
• An enhanced Staging Strategy is efficient and part s-friendly. 
o Once disassembled and cleaned, the parts/component s must leave the cleaning area 
and move to the part/component rebuild area.  The sooner the clean parts leave this 
area, the cleaner they stay. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
In-Process Staging Strategy 
DATE 
11/28/06 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
1106-4.4-1038 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 6 
Eliminating the General Cleaning Area  and 
intermediate salvage area’s outgoing staging 
areas reduces parts contamination and parts wait 
time. 
It is easier to protect the parts/components with 
specialized staging equipment. 
 
Establishing the Final Subcomponent Rebuild 
Bay  incoming and outgoing staging areas 
provides like-component staging/handling 
equipment and: 
• Reduces staging space overall because, for 
example, many crankshafts can be stored 
efficiently with specialized equipment. 
• Uses less costly space than is used in the 
major component assembly areas (smaller 
cranes, lower ceilings, etc.)  
 
Delaying the Major Component Assembly Bay 
incoming staging until assembly occurs:  
• Maintains assembly job flexibility.  The bays 
are available for any job until one actually 
begins (since no parts are delivered until 
needed).   
• Allows a minimally sized assembly bay to be 
more productive if the parts and 
subassemblies can be delivered as needed 
instead of all-at-once (congesting the bay). 
 
 
 
• Intermediate Salvage Area 
Includes machine shop, head 
disassembly/cleaning bay etc. Once processed, 
the parts are immediately sent to the incoming 
staging area of the next processing bay (such as 
water pump rebuild, head, or turbo rebuild bays).  
Do not stage completed work in an out-going 
staging area. 
 
 
 
• Final Subcomponent Rebuild Bay  
Includes cooler assembly bay, head rebuild bay, 
etc. Once processed, the parts are staged in an 
outgoing staging area.  This staging area is best 
located close to the incoming staging area, but it 
would be acceptable to locate it in a protected 
satellite area. 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
In-Process Staging Strategy 
DATE 
11/28/06 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
1106-4.4-1038 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 6 
• Major Component (General) Assembly Bays 
o Do not stage parts/components in the bay until the  major component is being 
assembled.  
o Do not stage assembled major components in an asse mbly bay out-going staging area. 
Eliminating the general assembly area’s outgoing staging areas reduces transfer wait 
time for the test area and shop component storage area. 
 
• Test Cells 
Includes dynamometer or hydraulic test bench cell areas. Once processed, the parts are 
staged in an out-going staging area.  This staging area is best located close to the incoming 
staging area, but it would be acceptable to locate it in a protected satellite area. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1. Document as-is staging methods and performance. 
2. Define future staging strategy based on expected  product type, volume, size, etc. 
a. Plan for typical rebuild volumes as well as expe cted peak production business cycles. 
b. Investigate specialized product storage (shelves , carts, racks, etc.) and handling 
(cranes, carts, lift trucks, tugs, etc) equipment. 
c. Use Cat Facility Development and shop equipment supplier expertise as needed. 
3. Apply future strategy to shop layout plans. 
a. Consider staging location’s effects on product p rotection and flow paths. 
b. Add changes to shop layout drawing. 
c. Include shop technician teams in the review/appl ication stages. 
d. Use Cat Facility Development and shop equipment supplier expertise as required. 
4. Develop/document the new staging strategy/proced ure, with new roles and responsibilities. 
5. Establish new/adjusted repair/rebuild time requi rement targets as needed. 
6. Present strategy to shop employees. 
7. Install the staging processes, layout, and equip ment changes into the shop. 
a. This may occur in phases (as needed). 
8. Train employees to use the new procedures/equipm ent.  Follow-up/enforce immediately. 
9. Review process/equipment performance once establ ished. 
10. Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Increased capacity - These concepts reduced space requirements allowing the dealer to 
increase the number and size of general assembly bays. 
• Reduced cost – Pans/covers/sub-assemblies are stag ed in protected areas instead of 
assembly bays.  Assembly bays are rescheduled with minimal parts moves, saving set-
up/tear-down time/costs. 
• The dealer’s technicians work more effectively wit h more space to organize their activity.  
Rebuild times and target times dropped, raising standard (flat-rate) job profits. 
• Increasing quality – the rebuilt components incur less incidental damage and contamination. 
• Improved Operator/Technician Safety 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
In-Process Staging Strategy 
DATE 
11/28/06 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
1106-4.4-1038 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 6 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Investment Costs Vary 
o Well-built, protected rack for pumps cost $1000 US  while heavy-duty rollout shelves 
cost considerably more, depending on size, weight requirements, and supplier. 
• Facility 
o Staging space (re-organized) to locate it in CRA o r protected area. 
• Support Equipment 
o Staging racks, carts, stands for incoming componen ts. 
o Staging racks, carts, stands with contamination pr otection for out-going components. 
o Heavy duty roll-out head rack/shelves (providing c rane access) can be used for larger 
components, or standard racks and pallet can be used with lift truck storage and 
retrieval 
o Standard and custom designed carts are used for sh afts, pistons, rods, liners, etc.  
These are used for staging as well as transport. 
o Floor pallets typically consume lots of space and their use is discouraged. 
• People 
o Establish current staging concerns with team. 
o Establish process, layout, and equipment improveme nts through team. 
• Training 
o Define, establish, and enforce the new process and  duties with the production team. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
Shown below are examples of proper parts staging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crankshaft rebuild area - Shafts are 
protected and aisle accessible for retrieval. 
Fuel system rebuild area - Incoming groups on bottom shelf, outgoing groups 
on top shelf (protected). 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
In-Process Staging Strategy 
DATE 
11/28/06 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
1106-4.4-1038 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None. 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
CGM 
General assembly area - General parts are easily moved (wheels on rack) and located in a specific parking area.
