===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
January 2007  
0107-4.5-1060  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Parts Buffer Enhancement  
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management  
Safety 
 
 
 
Parts Buffer Enhancement ...................................... 1 
1.0  Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 3 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 3 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat ® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network.  
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Buffer Enhancement 
DATE 
2/2/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1060  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 4 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
In a CRC, parts cleaning is typically performed in dedicated general parts cleaning work bay.  
Parts cleaning may utilize several technologies, including high-pressure cabinet washing, manual 
solvent washing, or gasket scraping.  Parts cleaning must be managed to provide high quality 
rebuilds while minimizing costs and “over-cleaning”. 
 
Clean parts introduce minimal contaminates into a component, reducing internal parts wear and 
providing longer service life.  Clean parts also help assure that joints fit accurately and securely 
without future leaks.  Worn parts often retain gasket material, hard carbon, and rust in their joint 
mating areas, even after high-pressure cabinet washing.  These surface areas minimally require 
scraping and possibly buffing/blasting if the contamination is aggressive. 
 
Many cleaning processes create airborne debris. Minimal effects find the debris deposited on 
staged clean parts and inside equipment, while a worst case could send debris though the entire 
shop rebuild/assembly areas. In all instances, uncontrolled airborne debris creates an adverse 
situation for repair quality. 
 
This Best Practice describes a well-designed method of controlling the airborne debris generated 
when buffing parts.  It uses a downdraft table, often considered a standard piece of CRC cleaning 
equipment, to help control buffing debris.  These benches are typically used only with hand-held 
angle grinder type buffers but can be used more effectively with bench grinder type buffer. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Parts buffing is often performed with a handheld angle grinder over a downdraft table.  A bench 
grinder buffer is typically a more efficient (faster) tool if the piece part can be conveniently hand-
held.  Controlling the bench grinder’s airborne debris is often difficult since the wheel guard 
extraction systems are somewhat ineffective. 
 
The most effective debris extraction system utilizes a bench grinder mounted on a fabricated 
platform. The platform allows the buffer to be positioned into the downdraft table’s working area, 
where it is pinned in place. Once in-place, the platform assembly activates a switch allowing the 
operator to start the buffer. When the operator is finished with the buffer it can be stopped, 
unpinned, and pivoted outside the downdraft table working area to the side of the table. The table 
is now clean and available for standard use. 
 
Downdraft tables are effective at controlling buffing debris. Compared to a wheel guard extraction 
system, the table draws much more air through the buffing wheels and guards.  This arrangement 
catches much more buffing debris, preventing it from drifting onto the cleaning technicians, 
previously cleaned parts, or into the shop area.  
 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Buffer Enhancement 
DATE 
2/2/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1060  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 4 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1. Determine area in shop to be designated for clea ning/buffing. 
a. Assure cleaning area has supporting utilities (c ompressed air for angle buffer, lighting, 
and electricity as needed) 
b. Assure area has adequate space and access for eq uipment and parts staging. 
 
2. Design and construct enhanced buffing equipment 
3. Size to needs 
4. Establish equipment usability/configuration to a ssure easy cleaning/maintenance and 
professional appearance. 
a. Establish new/adjusted repair/rebuild time requi rement targets as needed. 
5. Eliminate the current processes/tooling/equipmen t strategy (only one best way). 
a. Install the layout/equipment changes into the sh op 
6. This may occur in phases, as needed, such as sho p arrangement, then equipment final 
design/fabrication. 
7. Promote change feedback as installation may surf ace new problems.  
a. Train employees to use the new procedures/equipm ent.  Follow-up/enforce 
immediately. 
b. Establish equipment maintenance schedule/respons ibility. 
c. Review process/equipment performance once establ ished. 
d. Establish and install any adjustments as needed.  
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Saves Labor  – Well designed/organized cleaning equipment reduces buffing efforts.  Product 
staged in accessible carts reduces space needed.  Less effort is required to maintain a clean 
work area and fewer parts need follow-up cleaning before assembly. 
 
Saves Time   – Parts are not staged in different areas for different types of cleaning, reducing 
work flow interruptions.  Protecting parts against airborne debris interferes less with cleaning. 
 
Increases Quality  – More effective cleaning equipment simplifies cleaning processes and 
promotes high technician professionalism. 
 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Facility 
o Re-organize workstation to allow for downdraft tab le and buffer placement, incoming 
and outgoing staging, and table maintenance as needed. 
 
• Support Equipment 
o A bench type buffer and an effectively sized downd raft table with side and overhead 
panels. 
o A fabricated platform for the buffer.  This would be attached to a pivot shaft. 
o A pivot shaft attached to the platform and suspend ed by flange-mounted bearings. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Buffer Enhancement 
DATE 
2/2/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.5-1060  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 4 
o Fabricated plates (3). 
o Two plates attached to the side of the downdraft t able, serving as platforms for the 
flange-mounted bearings. 
o One plate attached to the side of the downdraft ta ble, servicing as a buffer platform 
pinning anchor.  
o Flange mounted bearings (2) 
o A fabricated pivot-locking pin with a retention ch ain. 
o A micro-switch installed to assure the buffer cann ot be started until the buffer is 
pivoted/locked in the proper position. 
o An electric terminal box for safe connections and plug-ins. 
o Electrical cords as needed between switches, termi nals, and power supplies. 
o Clip fasteners for electric cord routing/retention . 
o Miscellaneous fastening hardware 
 
• People 
o Establish current cleaning concerns with team 
o Establish process, layout, and equipment improveme nts through team. 
 
• Training 
o Define/establish/enforce new processes, roles and responsibilities with production 
teams. 
o Remove replaced items (buffers/tables) from operat ions to prevent less effective 
cleaning. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
Several supporting attachments.  
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0107-4.4-1061   Parts Blasting Enhancement 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
Cat Global Mining
