===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
October 2006  
1006-4.2-1029  
  
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Powertrain Control Valve 
Rebuild Strategy 
 
Application Maintenance Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
Powertrain Control Valve Rebuild Strategy ............... 1
 
1.0  Introduction ....................................................... 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 3 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 4 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 4 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 5 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED O R TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Power Train Control Valve Rebuild Strategy 
DATE 
24 OCT 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-4.2-1029 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 5 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Control valves continue to be a critical component for long rebuilt torque converter and 
transmission service lives. The same technician who rebuilds the clutches, planetary and transfer 
gear groups typically handles control valve rebuilding – and in the same location.   
 
This Control Valve Rebuild Strategy Best Practice involves separating the valve rebuild process 
from the other major component activities. It means treating valve rebuilding in a similar 
environment to diesel engine fuel system service. 
 
 
The valve group should be transferred from the general disassembly and cleaning area to a 
“clean/controlled” environment for rebuild by a specialist. Then after rebuild it is returned to the 
assembly area for installation. 
 
This rebuild strategy: 
• Improves valve rebuild consistency and efficiency.  
• Reduces the power train rebuild technician’s skill  requirements in the general rebuild and 
assembly functions. 
• Improves rebuild quality with potential to improve  component life. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Valves are the most complex group in the major component.  A typical rebuild technician 
processes only one valve group per rebuild job, giving him limited repetitive exposure to valve 
rebuilding. This situation: 
• Reduces efficiency. 
• Increases error risk. 
• Increases technician skill requirements and cost.  
 
Valve parts are more vulnerable to debris than other component parts and require special 
cleaning. They are typically hand cleaned in the washers used for other parts. 
 
Valve handling damage and/or poor reuse decisions often result in unnecessary replacement 
and/or mid-life failures. Heavy debris-related damage can make the root cause of failure difficult 
to determine. 
 
Valve groups are complex assemblies that are best handled by an experienced specialist.  
Experience is best developed with job repetition. Repetition may not sufficiently occur if the 
technician rebuilds the entire major component. It is recommended that a special technician 
handle the valve group rebuild. 
 
Once removed from the major component, the valve groups must first be transferred to a 
specialized valve rebuild area.   
Note:  Some dealers use this area to rebuild other machine-related valves, such as implement, 
and/or steering clutch and brake valves. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED O R TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Power Train Control Valve Rebuild Strategy 
DATE 
24 OCT 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-4.2-1029 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 5 
The valve rebuild area should be a climate-controlled area with filtered air inlets that create a 
positive air pressure to keep other shop dust/debris out. This area may be similar to traditional 
fuel system rebuild area recommendations.  
 
The valve rebuild area is purpose-designed with: 
• Valve-specific wash baskets to organize/protect di sassembled parts 
• Automatic washing equipment for consistent cleanli ness, no damage, and reduced rebuild 
labor. 
• Special tools for high-quality work and reduced re build labor.  
• Effective valve group packaging and contamination control supplies to protect the group until 
installed on the major component. 
• Protective staging area where the group will remai n until the general assembly technician is 
ready to install it into the major component. 
 
The valve group is transferred to the major component general assembly bay when the assembly 
technician is ready for it.  Staging it in this bay prior to installation is acceptable only if the valve is 
fully assembled and protected from contamination and external physical damage. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1. Determine the anticipated type and volume of val ves to be rebuilt annually and the forecast for 
future volumes for at least the next five years. 
a. Determine the total number of labor hours requir ed to perform valve rebuilds and the 
number of employees required to supply these hours. 
b. Establish the amount of space required to disass emble, clean, rebuild, and assemble 
the valves. 
c. Establish what handling/storage equipment is req uired to stage incoming, in-process, 
and outgoing valve groups. 
d. Include peak factors to accommodate for expected  business cycles, overall 
increases/decreases, and sudden transients as expected. 
e. Include specialized product storage (shelves, ca rts, racks, etc.) and handling (cranes, 
carts, lift trucks, tugs, etc) equipment. 
2. Establish tooling needs and storage requirements . 
a. Research current dealer tool inventories and reb uild references/notes. 
b. Research Caterpillar tool recommendations and re build references. 
c. Establish needed cleaning, rebuild, and storage equipment for groups and tools. 
3. Apply the strategy to shop layout plans. 
a. Consider rebuild location’s effects on product p rotection and flow paths. 
b. Include shop technician teams in the review/appl ication stages. 
4. Consider the current segregated fuel system rebu ild area. This area may have reduced 
utilization with the advent of electronic and/or unit fuel injector applications. 
  
5. Develop, adjust and document rebuild procedure w ith quality checklists as needed. 
6. Establish new/adjusted repair/rebuild time requi rement targets as needed. 
7. Install the layout/equipment changes into the sh op (This may occur in phases as needed.) 
8. Train employees to use the new procedures/equipm ent. Follow-up/enforce immediately. 
9. Review process/equipment performance once establ ished. 
10. Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED O R TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Power Train Control Valve Rebuild Strategy 
DATE 
24 OCT 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-4.2-1029 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 5 
 
4.0 Benefits 
• Increased capacity: These concepts reduce space/ti me requirements in the general rebuild 
bays, allowing the dealer to increase the number of jobs completed in each bay. 
• Increased space utilization: Fuel rebuild area is often underutilized due to new product 
designs.  Unused space could be used for valve rebuilding. 
• Increased quality: Valve rebuild technicians devel op more specialized skills in the most 
complex rebuild area, increasing rebuild service life 
• Reduced labor/costs: Dealer technicians work more effectively with more space, specialized 
support equipment/tools, and fewer job variables.  Valves are rebuilt faster. 
• Technicians require fewer skills: Specialized jobs  allow dealers to develop/utilize less 
experienced technicians sooner after hire date. They can also develop them effectively with 
increasing skill requirements. Technicians do not have to know everything to contribute to a 
rebuild process. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Facility 
o Re-organize workstation/shop to allow for valve re build process, incoming and outgoing 
staging, parts washer, and a workbench as needed. 
o The fuel rebuild area may support this function wi th little resource adjustment, 
depending on its current status, size, and rebuild volume. 
• Support Equipment 
o Well-built washers will cost approximately US$2,00 0 - US$8,000. 
o A generic workbench to disassemble/assemble valves  as needed. 
o Specialized Caterpillar tools. (The dealer may alr eady have these.) 
o Staging equipment/racks as needed for incoming/out going valves. Include containers 
for valve protection. Eliminates floor staging. 
o Lifting devices such as cranes may be shared with other functions in the shop. Lift 
requirements are relatively low for a typical Caterpillar repair/rebuild facility and would 
be determined by the size of valve groups being handled. 
o Lifting chains, straps, and/or brackets may also b e shared with other functions. 
• People 
o Establish current valve rebuild concerns with team  
o Establish process, layout, and equipment improveme nts through team. 
• Training 
o Define/establish/enforce new processes, roles, and  responsibilities with production 
teams. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED O R TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Power Train Control Valve Rebuild Strategy 
DATE 
24 OCT 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-4.2-1029 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 5 
 
 
Enclosed dedicated room for pump and valve rebuilds – MATCO CRC in Hermosillo, Sonora, MX 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
• 1009-4.01-1211 - Transmission Control Valve Test B ench 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
• This Best Practice was written by: 
Russ Young 
Black Belt, Cat Global Mining
