===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Technician Labor 
Requirements Guide for 
Greenfield Mine Sites 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management 
Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
Technician Labor Requirements Guide for Greenfield 
Mine Sites .................................................................. 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Results ............................................................... 3 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 3 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 3 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
November 2007 
0906-4.5-1013 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
This Best Practice provides a technician labor requirement guide to dealers maintaining a fleet of 
Caterpillar machines at a Greenfield mine site.  It offers suggestions on how to calculate 
manpower requirements to a dealer that has not otherwise provided service in a mining 
application.   
 
Attention should be given to adequate manpower as it helps ensure early success and an 
improved customer relationship. Management and technician structure should be developed 
based on the needs of the customer. This structure can range from just on-site technicians to a full 
maintenance department with project managers, planners, fleet analysts and service billers.   
 
Parts and Service departments should be involved in developing the staffing requirements for on-
site personnel. A review of existing staffing should be considered if functions such as invoicing 
and warranty would be conducted off site. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
This Best Practice will outline the logic that should be applied when determining the technician 
labor requirements for a dealer who is new to mining.  This will ensure that the technician 
workforce accurately reflects the maintenance strategy of the dealership, the machine population, 
and that the dealer can deliver the availability and reliability the customer is demanding. 
 
Listed are the criteria used in developing the labor requirements  
• Annual utilization per machine 
• Fleet size by model 
• Number of shifts 
• Scheduling 
• Total days off per year 
• Technician hours worked per day 
• Technician efficiency / availability 
  
Roles that are calculated include 
• Shop technicians 
• Field technicians 
• Supervisors 
• Schedulers / Planners 
 
To determine labor requirements there must be an understanding of the performance metrics for 
mobile mining equipment.  The Performance Metrics for Mobile Mining Equipment document that 
is attached in this Best Practice provides useful information on the Maintenance Ratio.  The 
Maintenance Ratio is an indication of the amount of effort required to keep equipment in service 
as well as the efficiency with which labor is deployed and the effectiveness of the workforce. The 
Maintenance Ratio is calculated by dividing Maintenance and Repair Man-Hours by Operating 
Hours.  The Maintenance Ratio could be lower for machines where the site performance is 
defined as excellent versus poor. It is not realistic to say that a Greenfield site will be operating as 
“excellent” immediately. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Determining Technical Labor Requirements for 
Greenfield Sites 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 1 of 3 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
The Labor Analysis.xls spreadsheet attached to this document should be considered a reference 
point for determining labor requirements.  The values calculated in this spreadsheet should not be 
considered finite.  It is not intended to replace sound maintenance planning procedures. 
 
The information in this best practice should be adapted to local requirements.  The values used in 
the attached Labor Analysis.xls spreadsheet are worldwide averages.  Caution must be taken 
when assessing local abilities. 
 
The following steps should be taken to determine labor requirements: 
 
1. In the “Man Hours” tab enter 
a. Days in a year 
b. Days of leave etc. 
c. Days in cycle 
d. Days worked per cycle 
e. Hours worked per day 
f. Shifts worked per day 
g. Efficiency Factor 
 
2. In the “Maintenance Ratios” tab 
a. Review maintenance ratios for each machine type 
b. Modify maintenance ratios as necessary 
 
3. In the “Calculations” tab 
a. Review the Ratio of total techs 
b. Modify Ratio of total techs as necessary 
c. Review the Ratio of management to total techs 
d. Modify the Ratio of management to total techs as necessary 
 
4. In the “Fleet Entry” tab enter 
a. Each machine model by selecting it from the drop down box 
b. Quantity of each machine model 
c. Annual utilization of each machine model 
 
5. In the “Fleet List” tab enter 
a. Model 
b. Serial Number 
c. Planned Annual Usage 
d. Start Hours 
 
6. What to do if your machine is not listed in drop down box 
a. In the “Maintenance Ratios” tab 
1. Change the name of one of the “other” machines to fit your need 
2. Enter the maintenance ratio of the new machine 
The Efficiency Factor  is the percentage of 
time the technician actually spends working.  
The factor can and should be adapted to fit 
local requirements. 
The Maintenance Ratios are 
worldwide averages.  They can 
and should be adapted to fit 
local requirements. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Determining Technical Labor Requirements for 
Greenfield Sites 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 2 of 3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
b. I n the “Calculations” tab 
1. Change the name of the same “other” machine that was changed in the 
“Maintenance Ratios” tab 
c. In the “Fleet Entry” tab 
1. Unhide column “O” 
1. Highlight columns “N” and “P” 
2. “Right Click” while your cursor is in the highlighted columns 
3. Select Unhide 
4. Change the name of the same “other” machine that was changed in 
the “Maintenance Ratios” and “Calculations” tab 
2. Rehide column “O” 
1. Highlight column “O” 
2. “Right Click” while your cursor is in the highlighted columns 
3. Select Hide 
 
4.0 Results 
 
The Labor Analysis.xls spreadsheet provides a baseline number of shop and field technicians 
required to perform the maintenance on a Caterpillar fleet at a new mine site.  It also gives a 
number of direct supervisors and schedulers / planners needed per the number of technicians.  
There is an assumption that equal amounts of work are done on each shift. 
 
The numbers identified in this tool should be considered a reference point.  The values calculated 
in this spreadsheet should not be considered finite.  It is not intended to replace sound 
maintenance planning procedures. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
People – an understanding of the required maintenance data is required 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
Performance Metrics for Mobile Mining Equipment.pdf 
Greenfield Guidebook.pdf 
Labor Analysis.xls 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
NA 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
Mark Hazen 
Marketing Rep 
Hazen_mark_r@cat.com 
309-494-4172 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Determining Technical Labor Requirements for 
Greenfield Sites 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 3 of 3
