===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Understanding the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management 
Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
Understanding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 ........ 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 1 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 3 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat
® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
July 2007 
0906-4.5-1013 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Off balance sheet accounting misdeeds of corporations during the 1990’s were pivotal events that 
set the stage for governmental and investor outrage and the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
(SOX) Act of 2002. The SOX act has dramatically heightened standards and penalties for U.S. 
reporting companies. This means that all companies listed on a U.S stock exchange – including 
those headquartered overseas – must demonstrate they have proper controls in place. Other 
governments, including the European Union and Canada, have followed with their own versions 
of “truth in reporting” legislation. These laws represent a shift from disclosure legislation to 
substantive regulation of procedures and practices. Companies are now required to file quarterly 
reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission to disclose “all material off-balance sheet 
transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations), that may have a 
material current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, results of 
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, capital resources, or significant components of 
revenues or expenses. Truth in reporting is now a global issue – MARC contracts may link 
customers, dealers and Caterpillar into a compliance partnership.  
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
This Best Practice is intended as guidance to help businesses understand the objectives and 
components of any truth in reporting legislation such as Sarbanes-Oxley and appreciate the need 
to evaluate all contracts as well as their internal processes and procedures. This is a high level 
guide and does not replace the need to understand parent company requirements, local and 
national governmental statutes, or any rules related to industry or site of operations.  
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
A. A business must understand the objectives of Sarbanes-Oxley. Financial control must 
be in place to ensure:  
• An asset or liability exists at a point in time. 
• The transaction occurred within the period reported. 
• The asset, liability, expense or revenue item is measured or valued appropriately. 
• The financial statements are complete without undisclosed items or omissions. 
• The company has the rights to all assets and the obligations of all liabilities. 
• All amounts are presented and classified appropriately. 
 
B. Understand how Sarbanes-Oxley impacts a business 
Six areas where SOX impacts a business are: 
• Reporting / Accountability: Leadership must now certify in writing that financial statements 
are presented fairly and have NO untrue statements or omissions of material facts. 
Management has the responsibility for having an adequate system of internal controls to 
protect integrity of the numbers reported. 
• Audit Committee: There must be an experienced audit committee that is made up of 
independent directors. 
• Conduct: Companies must have a published code of conduct with protection for 
whistleblowers. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Understanding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
DATE 
2/23/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 1 of 4 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• Penalties: It is now a criminal offense for leadership to issue fraudulent financial 
statements. 
• Independence: Auditors must be fully independent, cannot perform any other function for a 
company and cannot accept employment for one year removed from the engagement. 
 
C. Evaluate your risk management process.  
• Risk management means that companies have accurate and tested control systems in 
place that allow for almost real time capture of important data and identification of 
problems. Risk arises as a consequence of the day-to-day choices employees make, and 
these choices are a consequence of the environment in which they work and the ways 
they are monitored and compensated. 
• Understand the control environment. This comes from the top down. There are six 
components of environment: integrity and ethical values, commitment to competence, 
management philosophy and operating style, organizational structure, assignment of 
authority and responsibility, and human resource policies and practices. 
• Review your internal and external risk. There are 7 components of risk. Risk can come 
from new technologies, information systems, new personnel, rapid growth, new product, 
restructuring, or foreign operations. 
 
D. Evaluate the control components. 
• Control activities – “how you do it.” There are 3 areas of control activities. The first is the 
preventative, detective and corrective controls. The second is the organizational controls 
that ensure there is adequate segregation of duties. Lastly is the system design, with 
consideration for both location and  controls aspects. 
• Information and communication – “Are you getting what you need?”. The review can be 
summed up as yes or no questions. Do you get the right data? Did you communicate the 
data? Is the data in the right form? Did you get the data in the right time frame? Yes to all 
of the questions means people get what they need. 
• Monitoring. – “Is anybody paying attention?” There must be an assessment of the quality 
of internal controls over time. Detection and timeliness of response is key. Response is 
better done before an audit. 
 
E. Evaluate your control objectives.  
• Companies usually have controls related to operational objectives. MARC objectives could 
include fleet availability, contract costs, component lives, labor costs etc. Controls over 
processes to report accurate operational metrics are the cornerstone of providing reliable 
financial information. Reliable financial information brings compliance. 
 
F. Understand financial reporting requirements. 
• Entities must disclose information that is reasonably likely to have a material effect on 
financial condition or results of operations. One key candidate for review is related to off-
balance sheet arrangements. MARC contracts usually include clauses and verbal 
agreements that must be reviewed continuously to ensure compliance. Below are some 
examples, but is not limited to: 
 
1. Risk sharing techniques 
2. Penalties 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Understanding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
DATE 
2/23/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 2 of 4 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
3. Make well clauses. 
4. Betterment clauses. 
5. Environmental liabilities 
6. Transfer of assets during and at end of contract. 
7. Rebates. 
8. Availability clauses. 
9. Verbal agreements. 
 
G. Understand disclosure thresholds. 
 
• If a Liability or loss is “probable”, the amount can be estimated, and should be recorded on the 
books. 
• If a potential loss is deemed “probable” but the amount cannot be reasonably estimated then 
no liability is booked but disclosure is required to inform users. 
• If the loss is deemed “remote” then no recognition or disclosure is required. 
 
H. Disclose items related to material off-balance sheet arrangements. 
 
• The nature and business purpose of the entities off-balance sheet arrangements. 
• The importance of the off-balance sheet arrangement to the company for liquidity, capital 
resources, market risk or credit risk support or other benefits. 
• The financial impact of the arrangements on the company revenue, expenses, cash flows and 
the companies exposure to risk as the result of the arrangements. 
• Known events, demands, commitments, trends or uncertainties that may affect the availability 
or benefits to the registrant of material off-balance sheet arrangements. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Avoidance of penalties and protection of the company’s reputation. 
 
• It is now a criminal offense to certify, corrupt, alter, or destroy documents or audit records. 
Should financial statements ever be re-stated after issue, CEO’s and CFO’s have to 
surrender monetary bonuses that were paid based on the statements released. They could 
also be barred from serving in those positions in the future. Fraud means automatic prison 
term for 25 to 30 years. 
• Protection of company reputation. Civil lawsuits have been filed by stockholders for loss of 
stock value based on admitted lack of internal controls. 
• Reviewing your contracts, internal controls & operational processes is a wise businesses 
practice and is an attribute of a successful company. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
Risk management and process control must be accepted and receive involvement from all 
disciplines in an organization. Examples of key process would include but are not limited to: 
 
• F inance and accounting. 
• Human resources. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Understanding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
DATE 
2/23/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 3 of 4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• Contract managers. 
• Marketing. 
• IT Systems. 
• Operations. 
• Top Management. 
• Independent auditors. 
• Local and national accounting standards. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
Sarbanes-Oxley and MARCs 2007.PDF 
 
Additional information from: 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
Securities and Exchange Commission: Various releases including 33-8182: 34-47264; FR-67. 
Report on Contract Risk Management: provided by Protiviti Risk Consulting. 
Discover the Hidden Benefits of Sarbanes-Oxley, by Sun Microsystems Financial Site. 
File Under ‘Nightmare’ CFO.com web  
Sarbanes-Oxley, Corporate Governance and Operational Risk: by Alan Morrison, University of 
Oxford, Sarbanes-Oxley Seminar July 22, 2004. 
US GAAP Accounting Standards Board. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None at this time. 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
Tim Shaw 
MARC Analyst 
Cat Global Mining – Product Support 
Shaw_Timothy_E@cat.com 
+1 309 675 4124 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Understanding the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
DATE 
2/23/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
0000-1.1-1001 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN         Page 4 of 4
