SOURCE: 1.0 Maintenance & Repair\1.01 Preventive Maintenance\1. Strategic\Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance.pdf
PAGES: 6
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
  
April 07 
1006-3.1-1022 
300 Hamilton Blvd., Ste. 300, Peoria, IL 61629-3810, U.S.A.      mining.cat.com 
 
 
 
 
B E S T  P R A C T I C E  S E R I E S 
Goals & Objectives for 
Preventive Maintenance 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management 
Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance ........ 1 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 6 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 6 
6.0 Supporting Attachments .................................... 6 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 6 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance 
DATE 
6/17/2011 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-3.1-1022 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 6 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Site support processes such as Preventive Maintenance are often times very much task -oriented, 
that is, the individuals responsible for their execution are aware of the activities associated with 
the particular job but are unaware of  the contributions their area of responsibility is making to the 
overall success of the project.  Using Performance Metrics to help define the specific impact that 
their role plays in the success of the project tends to make employees more goal -oriented and 
less task -oriented significantly increasing their personal involvement, sense of ownership and 
consequently performance in their jobs. 
 
This Best Practice relates to version II of Site Assessment items 2.9.1 and 2.9.8. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
A condition-based maintenance program is comprised of a number of critical functions.  Due to 
the frequency with which it is performed and the overall impact it can have on the success of a 
mine site, one of the most important of those functions is Preventive Mai ntenance (PM).  
Unfortunately, the term Preventive Maintenance has become almost generic in that it is used to 
describe virtually any maintenance, service or repair activity not performed as a result of a 
breakdown or failure. 
 
Preventive Maintenance commo nly involves a number of activities completed within the same 
time frame or window of opportunity. These activities normally include, but are not limited to the 
following:  
 
• Machine washing (either complete or partial washing), 
• Lubrication service (changing oil and filters and greasing of required locations), 
• Fluids management (taking oil samples, inspecting magnetic plugs, screens or filters), 
• Inspections (visual) for defects, damage, and wear, 
• Conducting instrumented system tests or measurements of performance, and 
• Execution of repairs for known defects and problems. 
 
When the term Preventive Maintenance is used, care must be taken to establish and understand 
which of the above activities are actually included. 
 
Machine downtime is a function of frequency and duration shutdown events.  Because PM is a 
high frequency activity (typically done every 250 to 500 hours), it is a major contributor to 
machine downtime particularly when PM duration (affected by efficiency) is long.  This explains 
why PM efficiency should be a primary concern. Another equally important concern should be PM 
quality / effectiveness ... getting the maximum possible benefit from the PM downtime event. 
 
Unfortunately, many mines and, as a consequence, the individuals responsible for perfor ming 
Preventive Maintenance at those mines, view it as repetitive, routine, boring and, in many 
instances, almost punitive duty. When this is the case, PM execution in terms of efficiency and 
more often effectiveness suffers and the value of Preventive Maintenance is greatly diminished. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance 
DATE 
6/17/2011 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-3.1-1022 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 6 
One way to re -engage PM personnel is to assist them in their understanding and appreciation of 
the importance of Preventive Maintenance. Defining Key Performance Indicators (KPI’s) that 
relate to the efficiency and effectiveness of the PM function and training the staff on the impact of 
those KPI's on overall site operations and success will encourage the staff to become more 
accountable for their performance and should drive improvement in the PM process.  
 
KPI's that quantify and contribute to an understanding of PM efficiency and effectiveness are: 
 
• Mean Time Between Shutdowns after PM (MTBS  after PM): A measure of PM effectiveness 
and a clear indication of the quality of the job performed.  Establish a target for hours to the 
first shutdown after PM and report back to the PM crew not only their actual performance 
relative to the target but also the cause of the first stoppage so issues that are found to be 
chronic can be addressed through changes in the PM process.  When a rmed with this kind 
of information the PM staff should be capable of providing better (more reliable) 
performance in terms of MTBS after the equipment is returned to operation. The 
Benchmark (best in class) for large Off Highway Trucks is 105 hours; a real istic target is 2 
to 3 times the overall MTBS.   
 
• Unavailability due to PM: A measure that quantifies the impact of PM on availability. There 
is no Benchmark associated with this metric but a reasonably valid target is in the range of 
2.75 to 3.25% for lar ge Off Highway Trucks in the 785 – 793 size class. The result of this 
measure should be taken in context with MTBS after PM.  If unavailability due to PM is below 
the range and MTBS after PM is low, it is a safe assumption that insufficient time and effort  is 
being placed on PM. Conversely, if unavailability due to PM is above the range and MTBS 
after PM is high, one can assume that the site is placing substantial emphasis on the value of 
PM.  
 
• Mean Time To Repair for PM (MTTR PM): Average PM execution time ; a measure of PM 
efficiency. There is no Benchmark associated with this measure but a reasonable target is 
in the 7.75 to 8.5 hour range for large Off Highway Trucks that are on a 250 hour PM 
service interval.  The target for equipment that is on a 500 ho ur PM service interval is 
higher, i.e. double that of the 250 hour interval. Establish target times for PM completion 
times and compare actual PM execution times relative to those targets. 
 
• Service Accuracy (SA) : A measurement of Preventive Maintenance exe cution timeliness 
based on a statistical calculation that predicts the probability that the next PM service will 
occur within the recommended range (+/ - 25 hours of target interval).  The calculation is 
based upon past performance and assumes that PM inter vals are normally distributed 
about the mean. The Benchmark for S.A. is 95% but an aggressive target that will yield 
excellent results is 90%. 
 
• Backlogs executed during PM :  Quantifies the use of the “window of opportunity” 
presented during the PM shutdown. 
 
• Backlogs generated during PM :  Quantifies the use of the “window of opportunity” 
presented during the PM shutdown for defect detection (an element of Condition 
Monitoring). 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance 
DATE 
6/17/2011 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-3.1-1022 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 6 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
Critical steps associated with the development and implem entation of a performance -based 
Preventive Maintenance process include: 
 
• PM Strategy:   
 
 Define what metrics will be used to quantify PM performance.  
 Establish realistic performance targets for those metrics. 
 Determine the raw data required to make the ne cessary calculations for quantifying the 
metrics identified above (turn the data into information you can use to help manage the 
site). 
 Define the distribution network necessary to communicate the information. 
 Define PM report format, display, and frequency requirements. 
 
• Personnel:   
 
 Determine what individuals in the organization will be responsible to the acquisition of 
raw data, the calculation of the required performance measures, and the distribution of 
that information.  Much of this activity will ta ke place in the Planning Department at 
most sites; the planner, “Fleet Analyst” (reliability engineer) are key individuals involved 
in on-site data management, i.e. calculations, analysis / interpretation, and distribution. 
 The scheduler must be aware of r esults interpretation guidelines and have access to 
the results since the nature of his work puts him in a position to drive positive change. 
 Define the individuals who will be responsible for PM.  Include not only Technicians but 
also their Management and Supervision. (It is our belief that PM is important enough to 
justify developing “specialists” for the PM activity). 
 Determine who will be responsible for training the organization in the analysis and 
interpretation of PM performance results; include site  management and everyone 
involved in the execution of Preventive Maintenance activities. 
 Determine what individual(s) from the PM organization will represent the interests of 
PM in Continuous Improvement process. 
 
• Implementation: 
 
 Deliver the training on the analysis and interpretation of PM performance results. 
 Establish a specific location in the area that Preventive Maintenance is executed for the 
display of PM performance results. Dedicated bay(s) assigned to PM activities is 
preferred. 
 Publish and display PM performance results in the designated area. 
 Use the output from the analysis and interpretation of PM performance results as input 
to the on -site Continuous Improvement process … devise solutions to identified 
problems. 
 Take appropriate action(s) to  implement solutions identified in the Continuous 
Improvement process. 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance 
DATE 
6/17/2011 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-3.1-1022 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
 
Execution Time (MTTR) MTBS after PM  
Service Accuracy
Unavailability due to PM
Blogs executed during PM
B a c k l o g s  E j e c u t a d o s
0
50
100
150
200
250
E n e r o  F e b r e r o  Marzo  A b r i l M a y o J u n i o J u l i o
M eses
C an t id ad
M e t a  M e s M e t a  P M B L  e n  P M B L  e n  T a l l e r T o t a l  e j e c u t a d o s
Cumpl imi ent o Ti em pos de  Ejec uci on
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 4 0
1 6 0
E n e r o  F e b r e r o  M a r z o  A b r i l M a y o J u n i o J u l i o
Me ses
%  d e M et a 
M TBS de spue s PM vs M TBS Fl ota
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
E n e r o  F e b r e r o  Marzo  A b r i l M a y o J u n i o J u l i o
M ese s
H o r as
M T B S  F l o t a
M T B S d es pu e s  PM
P r e c i s i o n  d e  S e r v i c i o
0
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0
H or as  S er v i c io
Indis ponibi lida d por  PM
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
PM
Analysis
Preventive Maintenance KPI's results
 
 
 
 
Photo 1: PM performance and 
scheduling board in the PM bay at a 
mine in Brazil. 
Photo 2:  A PM Technician 
explaining his interpretation of PM 
performance. 
Photo 3:  Schematic of the 
section of the PM Board 
dedicated to display the PM 
KPI’s. PM performance results. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance 
DATE 
6/17/2011 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1006-3.1-1022 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 6 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Benefits are accrued as a result of the influence of increased PM performance on fleet reliability, 
that is improved overall MTBS, and ar e linked to the impact of increased PM effectiveness and 
efficiency and the resultant overall improvement of fleet availability. 
 
The payback period is based on the fleet size, initial (pre -implementation) level of PM 
performance, and the extent of improvement realized and can be quantified in terms of increased 
machine availability (additional productive hours), improved resource deployment (personnel and 
facilities), and the reduction or elimination of penalties related to performance guarantee 
shortfalls. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Human Resources:  Human resource requirements can be identified through a review of 
the specific steps outlined in the “Personnel” section of the “Implementation Steps” 
guidelines above. The majority of those resource requirements wi ll be contained within the 
Preventive Maintenance organization of the Maintenance Department, the Maintenance 
Planning organization and the Training department. 
 
• Facility Resources:  A bulletin board or some other medium to display and communicate 
results of the Preventive Maintenance process will be required to implement this Best 
Practice. 
 
Costs include the physical implementation of a bulletin board to display and communicate results 
of the Preventive Maintenance process, the time spent developing mater ials and training the PM 
staff in the analysis and interpretation of those results, and the implementation of related changes 
developed via the Continuous Improvement process. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments  
 
Metrics (KPI’s) to Assess Process Performance –PDF document (see Attachments tab) 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None  
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Goals & Objectives for Preventive Maintenance Best Practice was authored by: 
 
Jim McCaherty 
Mining Equipment Management / Processes Division 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
+1 309 675 5595 
McCaherty_James_W@cat.com 
 
We would also like to acknowledge Sotreq’s Mining Division for their willingness to share their 
accomplishments with Caterpillar mining dealers worldwide. 
 
Special recognition to: 
 
Pedro Perim – Sotreq – Mining Business & Operations Support Manager 
Alexandre Renno - Sotreq - Mining Project Support Mgr (formerly Sotreq Project Mgr at Samarco)
