SOURCE: 3.0 Component Life Management\3.03 Fluid Cleanliness\2. Tactical\Bulk Fuel Storage and Handling.pdf
PAGES: 5
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Bulk Fuel Storage & 
Handling 
 
Application Maintenance 
Component 
Life 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
Bulk Fuel Storage & Handling .................................... 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 3 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 4 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 4 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
  
 
 
 
 
  
November 2006 
1106-2.10-1037 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Mine sites purchase, store, and consume millions of gallons of fuel each year. The quality of fuel 
is a major factor in machine performance economy and durability. Proper handling and storage 
can reduce fuel contaminants and contamination related failures. Increasingly complex and 
sophisticated fuel injection systems require much cleaner fuel than in the past. The use of 
contaminated fuel in modern fuel systems can cause an unacceptable rate of injector failure and 
unnecessary repair costs. Proper handling and storage can remove a good portion of fuel 
contaminants and help improve machine performance. 
 
Since most fuel injector failures or premature wear-outs are the result of contaminated fuel, 
understanding a few important principles of fuel handling, storage, and tank design will help to 
reduce unnecessary failures, prolong injector life, maintain fuel economy, and increase machine 
availability.  
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
The two most common contaminants in the fuel are dirt and water. Excessive dirt causes 
premature injector wear-out. Excessive water reduces fuel lubricity and can cause injector seizure 
and contingent engine damage. The two critical factors in fuel quality are: 
• The cleanliness of fuel delivered to the site 
• The storage and handling practices used after the fuel arrives  
 
Clean fuel delivered to the machine fuel tank is defined by Caterpillar as ISO 18/16/13 or cleaner 
with a maximum water content of 500 ppm. 
 
In some geographic areas, fuel suppliers to mines have the infrastructure and discipline to deliver 
relatively clean fuel. However, in the majority of mining applications that is not the case. Fuel 
leaving the refinery is transported to remote locations through ships, pipelines, barges and trucks 
and is often stored in intermediate storage tanks. Each time the fuel is stored or moved, it has the 
opportunity to attract contaminants. In some cases, gross amounts of water and/or dirt can 
contaminate the fuel. Much of this can be removed through proper storage and handling. 
 
Fuel Storage Capacity 
Given adequate storage time, much of the dirt and water in fuel will settle to the bottom of the 
storage tank if the fuel is left undisturbed. Fuel storage capacity on the site should adequate to let 
new fuel deliveries settle for 2-3 days before drawing supply fuel from the tank. New fuel should 
never be added to the tank while the tank is being used for supply. This only serves to stir up 
settled contaminants on the bottom of the tank and put them back in suspension, contaminating 
the supply fuel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Bulk Fuel Storage & Handling 
DATE 
2/17/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1106-2.10-1037 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 1 of 4 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
Storage Tank Design 
Regardless of size or shape, fuel storage tanks should have the following key design features: 
• Sloped tank floor 
• Well located suction pipe 
• Desiccant vent filters 
• Non-corrosive tank lining 
 
Sloped Tank Floor 
The tank floor should be sloped with a drain at the lowest point. Since water is heavier than fuel, 
water which settles out of the fuel will flow to the lowest spot in the tank. It can then be easily 
drained and disposed of. Tanks should be drained frequently to minimize the presence of water 
on the tank floor. Water provides a breeding ground for bacterial growth, which can cause severe 
filter plugging on machines and corrosion damage to the storage tank. The frequency of drain 
intervals depends on ambient temperature and humidity, as well as, the contamination of the fuel 
being delivered.  
 
Suction Pipe Location 
The suction pipe on the tank should be well above floor level in order to ensure that only clean 
fuel is drawn in, and water and dirt have that have settled to the bottom of the tank remain 
undisturbed. Older design storage tanks often had suction pipes located at or near the bottom of 
the tank. This kept the tank floor clean by allowing contaminants to flow out with the supply fuel. 
Most newer design tanks use an elevated suction pipe. Some high quality tanks use a floating 
suction pipe that rises and falls with the fuel level in the tank. This feature always draws fuel from 
the highest and cleanest level. 
 
Desiccant Vent Filters 
Daily temperature changes along with air drawn into the tank as fuel is withdrawn can cause 
condensation. Desiccant vent filters should be used on the tank vent in order to remove any 
moisture from air entering the tank. These filters have a finite capacity and must be replaced 
when the desiccant is exhausted. 
 
Tank Lining 
Tanks should be epoxy coated on the inside to prevent corrosion. At a minimum, the tank floor 
and the bottom three feet of the tank sides should be epoxy coated to resist corrosion from 
trapped water. 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Bulk Fuel Storage & Handling 
DATE 
2/17/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1106-2.10-1037 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 4 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
Major fuel suppliers have the technical expertise to provide guidance on tank design and sizing. 
The most common problem on most mine sites is lack of tank capacity. The mine capacity and 
haulage fleet often grows faster than the fuel storage facility. This usually results in fuel being 
added to tanks while it is being consumed. This practice stirs up contaminants and keeps them in 
suspension in the delivery fuel. There are three key steps to proper fuel storage and handling. 
• Adequate capacity to allow fuel to settle 
• Proper tank design 
• Fuel handling maintenance 
 
Fuel Handling Maintenance 
It is important to have an adequate number of trained personnel responsible for making sure fuel 
is handled properly. This includes: 
• Using particle counters and water detection tests to measure fuel cleanliness. 
• Sampling incoming shipments 
• Assuring proper settling time and draining tanks to remove water 
• Maintaining desiccant filters and any supplemental bulk fuel filtration equipment 
• Sampling outgoing fuel going into machine tanks. 
• Assuring fuel quality in remote day tanks and mobile fuel trucks 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Bulk Fuel Storage & Handling 
DATE 
2/17/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1106-2.10-1037 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
4.0 Benefits 
Maintaining ISO 18/16/13 or better fuel cleanliness with a 
maximum of 1,000 ppm water should allow most 3500 Series 
injectors to last to engine overhaul.  
 
• If 18/16/13 cannot be achieved with proper tank capacity 
and fuel handling, the use of bulk fuel filtration is 
recommended to achieve needed fuel cleanliness. Bulk 
filtration equipment is available through Caterpillar.  
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
Cost information can be obtained from the tank constructor prior 
to construction of new tanks. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
For more information on bulk fuel filtration equipment, refer to Caterpillar publication: 
 
Caterpillar Bulk Fuel Filtration Equipment      PEHJ0156  
 
For more information on the effects of water and dirt on fuel injector life, bulk fuel filtration, and 
fuel storage and handling, refer to the following publications (available in print form only): 
 
Improving Component Durability – Fuel Systems    SENR9620  
Improving Component Durability – Managing Fluid Cleanliness  SEBF1020 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0806-2.1-1000  Fluid Cleanliness Management     
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Richard Douglas  
Market Consultant  
Douglas_Richard_d@cat.com 
(309) 675-5699 
IF INJECTORS USUALLY RUN 
TO ENGINE OVERHAUL 
HIGH EFFICIENCY FUEL 
FILTERS ARE USED AND DO 
NOT PLUG BETWEEN PM 
INTERVALS 
FUEL IS ADEQUATELY 
CLEAN 
& 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Bulk Fuel Storage & Handling 
DATE 
2/17/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
1106-2.10-1037 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 4
