SOURCE: 1.0 Maintenance & Repair\1.02 Condition Monitoring\2. Tactical\Electronic Data Usage for Equipment Management on Construction Projects.pdf
PAGES: 4
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE 
Electronic Data Usage for 
Equipment Management on 
Construction Projects 
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
Electronic Data Usage for Equipment Management on 
Construction Projects ................................................. 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 1 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 1 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 3 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 3 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat
® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
February 2013 
1301-1.02-1304 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
The introduction of electronic data reporting and tracking on mobile construction equipment has allowed fleet 
managers to monitor their fleets in ‘real time’ with an abundance of data flowing in on a daily basis.  
Unfortunately all of this data can overwhelm a fleet manager and sometimes cause them to micro-manage 
rather than looking at their overall fleet status.  For many fleets, focusing on the basic fleet data can still 
provide the biggest return in time savings and consistent, correct data coming from their machines. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
This Best Practice outlines how focusing on managing a few very basic pieces of electronic data can translate 
into time efficiencies for and cost savings for an entire equipment department on a construction project where 
the work and environment changes on a daily basis. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
The largest obstacle to implementing electronic data into the fleet management process is to have participation 
and buy-in from the entire equipment management staff.  Everyone needs to be on the same page and 
understand the benefit to both their job roles as well as the overall fleet benefits.  There also needs to be an 
understanding from the top management level that there is some implementation costs, however those costs 
will be easily returned in the manpower and equipment cost savings. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
This project site is utilizing pieces of Technology, bundled together, each with their own value added traits: 
 
Equipment Location and Runtime 
o Caterpillar Product Link is being utilized to aid in managing runtime and utilization reporting.   
 Equip location reported hourly with PL522 
 Equipment runtime and utilization reporting 
 Fuel utilization reporting (burned idle vs. production) 
 Fault code reporting and maintenance plan tracking 
 Geo-fencing parameters and hourly location logger  
 Idling tracking (Idle based on engine RPMs) 
 
  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Electronic Data Usage for Equipment Management on 
Construction Projects 
DATE 
2/13/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1301-1.02-1304 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 1 of 3 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
Equipment Fuel Management 
o Smart” Lube Trucks  
 The smart lube truck is a modern lube truck outfitted with a computer, wireless capabilities, and 
electronic flow-meters installed on each reel.  
 The rear screen displays the list of equipment within a 200 ft radius and the current hour meter 
reading. This system also records the amount of fluids (fuel/oil) added to the machine and time 
stamps it with the hour meter. 
 There is a tablet in use in the cab of the lube truck, linked to the OEM Website and the “live” lube 
sheet. This living document is updated as the equip drives the job and allows the lube technician to 
plan his route based on what needs fuel and what doesn’t. 
 This tablet has a software that can be used to pull the exact location of the piece of equipment 
needing fuel, oils or other lube services in the field. 
o Allows access to the Job Equipment Management system for any information that may be 
needed while in the field. 
o Fuel Management – OEM Solutions (part of the Smart Lube truck) 
 Displays list of equipment within 200 ft 
 The meter hours are displayed for the selected unit 
 Tracks time and amount fuel and oil dispensed to equipment 
 U ploads quantities into the customer database 
 Eliminates man hours of data entry and possible error in records 
  
  
o Fuel Master System  
 This system is utilized at the Fuel Farm to dispense fuel into the Lube Trucks 
 Eliminates man hours of data entry and record keeping 
 Utilizes RFID  technology to control fuel being dispensed, fuel will not be dispensed without the  
RFID tag 
 Records fuel dispensed, tied into the ECM which checks for error codes and allows for the 
reduction of stolen fuel 
 Enhances fuel control and accurate fuel records 
 
The OEM Computer Display Screen in the back of the Lube Truck 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Electronic Data Usage for Equipment Management on 
Construction Projects 
DATE 
2/13/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1301-1.02-1304 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
To implement these strategies there needs to be a dedicated electronics data ‘champion’ within the fleet 
department that is capable of evaluating the equipment fleet and deciding what pieces and/or systems fit best 
with the operation.  A thorough vetting process should take place when looking at all of the products available 
on the market.  This individual would also be responsible for creating and delivering the training to the entire 
equipment staff to ensure a clear consistent message is delivered.  A dedicated Information Technology 
person would also be very beneficial to ensuring that systems will communicate effectively with each other 
before choosing vendor(s). 
 
Once the strategy is deployed and systems are in place, each of the disciplines within the equipment 
department should have a dedicated person to monitor the data, run reports, and compile action items based 
on the incoming data.  If the systems are left as part someone else’s already long list of daily activities it may 
quickly get left behind and the true value will not be realized.
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
N/A 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
N/A 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
Scott Weyant 
Product Support Manager 
Caterpillar Inc. 
Weyant_Scott_T@cat.com 
 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Electronic Data Usage for Equipment Management on 
Construction Projects 
DATE 
2/13/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1301-1.02-1304 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 3
