SOURCE: 5.0 MARC Management\5.01 MARC Market Strategy and Rate Development\2. Tactical\Building Operational Budgets.pdf
PAGES: 5
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PR ACTICE SERIES  
 Building Operational Budgets  
 
 Maintenance 
and Repair Application 
Component 
Renewal 
(CRC) 
Component 
Life 
Management 
 MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
Building Operational Budgets ..................................... 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 3 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 3 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
November 2008 
1108-3.3-1132 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
This Best Practice outlines a strategy for building operational budgets with the appropriate 
level of detail to facilitate contract performance review, highlighting problem areas.  
 
Operating budgets generally cover operating expenses for normal operations. Operating 
expenses can be budgeted (planned for) and accounted for on a monthly, quarterly, and/or 
annual basis. Operating budgets are usually fixed through a process different from that used 
on capital budgets (in some companies, all management above a certain level participate in 
the process). Once fixed, budgets are usually not changed during the period-except maybe for 
emergency reductions following unexpectedly poor sales results or other disasters.  
 
Operating budgets generally cover predictable, repeatable costs. Items bought under an  
expense budget” (as opposed to a capital budget) are not registered as capital assets and are 
not depreciated. That means the company charges the full amount against income during that 
reporting period, incurring all tax consequences for it during that period.  
 
Caution should be observed building this type of budget. Too much detail is inefficient, 
requiring a great deal of data cleansing for administrative staff.  It does not provide the benefits 
for this effort. Budgets that are too broad in scope do not deliver the level of detail required for 
analysis, which can result in positive direction for change. 
 
Most Caterpillar dealers have the capability to create operational budgets, but few have a 
formalized process to review the budget performance. It is necessary to highlight the problem 
areas and establish action plans to mitigate the performance risks. This process provides 
tangible dealer benefits in the form of improved productivity and reducing overall operating 
costs, which leads to a reduced risk in MARC’s and lower overall repair, and maintenance 
costs. 
 
By implementing an operational budget, a dealer is able to see firsthand the areas that need 
improvement. Seeing the areas that need improvement will allow the dealer to make decisions 
to increase profitability and better performance.  
 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
There are two different approaches to budgeting. The first approach is referred to as the 
behavior approach. The underlying assumption of this approach is that managers will be the 
most highly motivated if budgets are reasonable and achievable. Targets of this approach can 
be achieved through reasonably efficient operations. With this approach, failure to stay within 
budget in contrast is viewed as unacceptable. The second approach is referred to as the total 
quality approach. The basic premise of this approach is that each segment of the operation 
strives to improve. Each operation strives to eliminate non-value added activities. With this 
approach, budget amounts are set to achieve absolute efficiency.  
 
There also two different approaches for a time period when using operational budgets. The 
first approach is the fiscal year approach. The fiscal approach contains annual budgets that 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Building Operational Budgets 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1108-3.3-1132 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 1 of 4 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
are divided monthly into four quarters. As the end of a quarter approaches, revisions are done 
for economic changes. This process ensures that the budgets are reviewed at least several 
times per year.  
 
As the year progresses the planning process gets shorter. The second approach is referred to 
as the rolling twelve-month approach. With this approach a new month/quarter is added to 
the end of the budget as the quarter ends. The budget always covers the upcoming twelve-
month period. The advantage of this approach is that this is a stabilized planning horizon. This 
approach consists of continuous review and assessment of the budget estimates. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
As a dealer gains contract experience, the use of historical data becomes the best source of 
information when populating the budget amounts. 
 
For dealers with first time projects, the proposal can go back to the team and then to the most 
experience members of the dealership to populate the budget amounts. The dealer may also 
go to other dealers with existing operations for assistance with the first time project.  
 
All areas of the business become involved in the development of an operational budget.  From 
the sales department, parts department, to IT, all aspects of the business become a part of the 
budgetary strategy.  
  
*This figure illustrates how input from all areas of the business makes this strategy work 
 
                                        Service Department 
                           -Labor hour                  -Structure of Job/Component Codes 
                          -Types of Repairs         -Misc. Charges    
                          -Repair Process  
Customer         Caterpillar 
-Wants and Needs       - Guidance/Council 
 
Sales Department       Administration 
-Models               -Financial Tracking 
-Sales Strategy              -Reporting Structures 
-Customer Needs 
-Sales/Marketing Strategy 
     Parts Department  Human Resources  
    - Parts Inventories       -Staffing and Support 
     - Parts Exchange        -Training/Development 
Information Technology   
 - Communication     
 - Net Work Development 
 
 
 
 
MARC 
Strategy 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Building Operational Budgets 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1108-3.3-1132 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 4 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
An individual or team entity acting as a single point of contact should be appointed to be 
responsible for following and managing a budget after it has been implemented.  
 
See the files attached to this document, which contain examples of budgets that can be used 
for site and analyzer application.  
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Enhanced management responsibility 
o Causes a manager to consider all aspects of the operation. 
• Decision making responsibilities over company resources. 
o Management is forewarned of issues real time. 
o Holds employees accountable for the results of their decisions. 
• Coordination of Activities 
o Preparation and communication across departments provides another 
department quantitative terms of what is expected during a period. 
• Cross check the critical assumptions 
o Rate development process. 
• Performance Evaluation 
o Budget provide a yard stick with each department measured. 
o A cross check to rate development critical assumptions. 
o Provides a clear line of site to provision requirements. 
 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
The project manager has the single biggest impact on the profitability of a contract in terms of 
budget performance. The project manger must coordinate the use of resources through 
planning and organizing.  The project manager must also possess the ultimate responsibility 
as a decision maker. 
 
With budget performance, the work order technician has the next biggest impact on the 
profitability of a contract. The work order technician must coordinate costs through planning 
and organizing, and posses a high level of responsibility as decision maker. 
 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
The attached files detail and outline the features and benefits of operational budgets for the 
site application. 
 
 Building Operational Budgets.ppt 
 Mine Site Budget_2.xls 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Building Operational Budgets 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1108-3.3-1132 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0907-3.3-1086  Localizing a Centerline Builder File for MARC Rate Development  
 
Building operational budgets – Analyzer element requires the implementation of the Best 
Practice listed above. This implementation will ensure the budgets created and used in 
Analyzer will match the product sold by the dealer and delivered to the site. 
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This Best Practice was authored by: 
Don O’Neill 
GMD MARC Development & Support 
309.675.4861 
oneill_don_g@cat.com 
 
 
This Best Practice as co-authored by: 
Rachel Merriman 
GMD Intern 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Building Operational Budgets 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
00 
NUMBER 
1108-3.3-1132 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 4
