SOURCE: 3.0 Component Life Management\3.03 Fluid Cleanliness\2. Tactical\Off-Board Machine Filtration.pdf
PAGES: 6
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Off-Board Fluid Filtration 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management 
MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
 
Off-Board Fluid Filtration ............................................ 1
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 5 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0 Supporting Attachments .................................... 5 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
  
August 2006 
0806-2.10-1002 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
The performance expectations for components and systems on modern mining machines have 
grown rapidly in the past two decades. This has driven the design of hydraulic systems to operate 
at much higher pressures, and dramatically increased the load factor on drivetrain components. 
The increased performance demands also increase the rate of abrasive wear and failure of 
components compared to older designs, which operated at lower load factors.  
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
2.1 Debris 
In order to increase durability, it is necessary to operate components and systems in much 
cleaner fluids throughout the life of the component. There are three sources of debris: 
 
2.1.1 Assembly Debris 
A large amount of debris is often present in machine systems when new machines are 
assembled. In the past, failure to remove this debris caused a high rate of system malfunctions 
and component failures at the factory and in early-hour operation. As a result, portable filter 
carts were designed for use in the factory to clean machine systems before machines were 
shipped. When used properly, these carts effectively removed assembly debris and cleaned 
systems to a factory ship target of ISO 18/15. This cleaning of systems prior to shipment 
dramatically reduced the incidence of early-hour problems. 
 
2.1.2 Break-In Debris 
There is a widespread misconception that nearly all system debris is from  new machine 
assembly, and that once systems are cleaned properly, they stay clean. This is not true. Most 
components produce debris as a result of the normal break-in process. The length of the 
break-in process and volume of debris produced varies by system. A mining truck provides a 
good example of how systems vary. 
 
Steering System 
Steering systems essentially consist of a small piston pump, steering cylinders and a 
control valve. Once assembly debris is removed from this system, it produces very little 
break-in debris and normally stays clean with standard machine filtration. 
 
Transmission 
Transmission clutch discs, and gears produce moderate amounts of break-in debris. 
This process usually takes between 100-200 hours to complete. Even if the 
transmission were perfectly clean after assembly, break-in debris would still be 
produced. 
 
Final Drive & Differential 
The rear axle produces very large amounts of break-in debris from gears. This process 
may last up to 8,000 hours. This debris is almost all very small abrasive particles from 
the hardened gears. 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Off-board Fluid Filtration 
DATE 
22 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1002 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 6 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
2.1.3 Normal Wear Debris 
After the break-in process is complete, components still produce microscopic wear particles, 
but at a much slower rate. The rate is largely affected by how many wear particles are already 
in the oil. If the oil is contaminated with a high number of abrasive particles, the normal 
component wear process is greatly accelerated. If the oil is very clean, the normal wear 
process is much slower, which significantly extends component life. 
 
On-board machine filtration on most mining machines is not capable of maintaining high levels 
of fluid cleanliness necessary to maximize component life. As a result, portable factory filtration 
carts are used during PM’s and after system repairs. This practice has grown with the increase 
in MARC contracts and extended component life guarantees. 
 
2.2 Off-Board Machine Filtration (Kidney Loop) 
The use of off-board filtration carts started in the factory to remove assembly debris that was 
causing frequent production line and early-hour problems. The practice eventually migrated to 
dealers where the carts were initially used to clean systems after a major repair or component 
replacement. This later evolved into use of carts during PM intervals. Those dealers found that 
consistent use of the carts for several hours during PM removed large amounts of debris and 
helped to achieve and maintain a much better level of oil cleanliness. 
 
There are four basic applications of filtration carts in dealer shops and mine sites: 
 
2.2.1 New Machine Assembly: 
Large mining machines are too big to ship fully assembled, so large components such as 
wheel groups are assembled in the field. It is impossible to maintain system cleanliness when 
major components are open to contamination during assembly.  
 
Even in systems that are shipped assembled (such as hydraulics) cleanliness levels on new 
machines often exceed the factory roll-off spec of ISO 18/15. This has caused great debate 
between dealers who claim the system arrived dirty and factory personnel who claim it left 
clean. There are three reasons for this: 
 
System Not Cleaned Properly 
In a few cases, the system cleanliness may exceed the pre-shipment specification, due 
to inadequate cleaning prior to shipment. 
 
Variability in Particle Counters 
Particle counters (whether lab or portable) basically shine a small laser beam through 
an oil sample and count the number and size of shadows caused by particles in the oil. 
They also count water droplets, air bubbles and large agglomerated particles oil 
additives. Inherent variability in both, the particle counter and the sample treatment 
process, may account for elevated readings of one to two ISO codes. This is problem is 
even more prevalent in the field use of portable particle counters where cleaning 
between samples and sample treatment techniques may vary widely. It is not 
uncommon (due to variability in the particle counter) to deliver varied results (readings) 
from the same oil sample.   
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Off-board Fluid Filtration 
DATE 
22 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1002 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 6 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
 
Additive Interference 
Some new oils contain large amounts of additives. Some of these additive molecules 
attract and form large clusters in systems where the oil is not be used (such as new 
systems). These clusters may get large enough appear as a debris particle to a particle 
counter, and cause the particle count to be higher than it actually is. On new machines, 
systems should be exercised 1-2 hours to break down these additive clusters before a 
relatively accurate particle count can be taken. 
 
2.2.2 PM Intervals 
Many dealers or customers who are interested in maximizing component life use filtration carts 
for the major systems during normal PM’s. It typically takes 10-15 minutes per system to 
connect the carts to each system (rear axle, transmission, hydraulics, steering) at the start of 
the PM. Carts are then allowed to run unattended for several hours while normal PM services 
are completed.  
 
2.2.3 System Oil Changes: 
A long-standing spec for new oil cleanliness has been ISO 16/13. With the increasing level of 
additives in the oil, filtering oil to this level has become increasingly difficult. In addition, not all 
sites can justify the cost of permanent recirculating filtration for new oil. A viable alternative is 
to fill the compartment with new oil and then install and use an off-board filter cart to achieve 
the desired cleanliness. Machine system contamination is not a problem since the filtration 
process occurs before the machine is started. It also has the added benefit of removing some 
system contaminants that would not otherwise be removed if only new clean oil was installed. 
 
2.2.4 Major Repairs 
When major components are replaced or systems are opened up for repair, filtration carts 
should be used to maximize system cleanliness. A leading cause of failure of rebuilt 
components is failure to clean the system before the new component is put back in service. 
This is especially true with catastrophic failures, where the system is contaminated with failure 
debris. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
There are several criteria for the number and size of carts required. 
 
Cart Size 
Cart filter size and flow rate is determined by the capacity of the system being filtered. As a 
rule of thumb, the cart should be sized to filter the volume of the system 35 times in a 
reasonable period of time. 
 
Oil Type 
A different cart is required for each oil type. (Example: rear axle oil cannot  be mixed with 
hydraulic oil) 
 
Fleet Size 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Off-board Fluid Filtration 
DATE 
22 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1002 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 6 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
The number and model of machines being maintained determine the number of carts required. 
For medium and large fleets, two sets of carts are often required: one set for PM and one for 
repair. An inadequate number of carts often results in a cart being used for PM or repair and 
unavailable for use on another machine when needed. 
 
Help with determining the correct number of carts needed, cart size and required tooling is 
available from the Caterpillar Service Tools Group or from the Marketing and Product Support 
Contamination Control Group. 
 
Service Tools Group – contact Jim Balfanz, 
Balfanz_James_W@cat.com 
 
Contamination Control Group – contact Dave Baumann, Baumann_David_L@cat.com 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Maintaining oil cleanliness for major components and machine systems increases both reliability 
and durability. Electro-hydraulic control valves, which are widely used in transmission controls 
and implement hydraulics, are very intolerant of microscopic, ferrous debris. Heavily loaded 
wheel and final drive bearings, as well as, duo-cone seals are also easily damaged by abrasive 
debris commonly found in new oil. Assuring the new oil is cleaned to the desired cleanliness 
level, and maintaining ISO 18/15 or better significantly reduces the number of contamination 
induced failures and repairs and significantly extends component life. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
The number and size of filter carts required is determined by fleet size. Carts may be purchased 
through Caterpillar Service Tool Group, outside suppliers, or built by the dealer. Training for 
maintenance and operation personnel is also required so that they fully understand the function 
and importance of the use of filter carts. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments  
 
“Improving Component Durability” booklet set- form # SEBF1021.  
Consists of one of each of the following: 
 Fuel Systems   SENR9620 
 Final Drives and Differentials SEBF1015 
 Powershift Transmissions  SEBF1016 
 Component R&I   SEBF1017 
 Engines    SEBF1018 
 Hydraulics    SEBF1019 
 Managing Fluid Cleanliness SEBF1020 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
0808-2.10-1003  -On-board Fluid Filtration 
0806-2.10-1000  -Managing Fluid Cleanliness 
 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Off-board Fluid Filtration 
DATE 
22 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1002 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 6 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Off-board Fluid Filtration Best Practice was authored by: 
Dick Douglas 
Market Consultant 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
Douglas_Richard_D@cat.com  
1-309-675-5699 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Off-board Fluid Filtration 
DATE 
22 AUG 06 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0806-2.10-1002 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 6
