SOURCE: 4.0 Component Rebuild (CRC)\4.03 Facility & Tooling\3. Quick Win\Parts Blasting Enhancement.pdf
PAGES: 4
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
January 2007  
0107-4.4-1061  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Parts Blasting 
Enhancement  
 
Application  Maintenance  Site 
Management  
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management  
 
 
Parts Blasting Enhancement ................................... 1 
1.0  Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 3 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 3 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 4 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat ® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Blasting Enhancement 
DATE 
2/6/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1061  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 4 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
In a CRC, parts cleaning is typically performed in dedicated general parts cleaning work bay.  
Parts cleaning may utilize several technologies, including high-pressure cabinet washing, manual 
solvent washing, or gasket scraping.  Parts cleaning must be managed to provide high quality 
rebuilds while minimizing costs and “over-cleaning”. 
 
Clean parts introduce minimal contaminates into a component, reducing internal parts wear and 
providing longer service life.  Clean parts also help assure that joints fit accurately and securely 
without future leaks.  Worn parts often retain gasket material, hard carbon, and rust in their joint 
mating areas, even after high-pressure cabinet washing.  These surface areas minimally require 
scraping and possibly buffing/blasting if the contamination is aggressive. 
 
Many cleaning processes create airborne debris. Minimal effects find the debris deposited on 
staged clean parts and inside equipment, while a worst case could send debris though the entire 
shop rebuild/assembly areas. In all instances, uncontrolled airborne debris creates an adverse 
situation for repair quality. 
 
This Best Practice describes a well-designed method of controlling the airborne debris generated 
when blast-cleaning parts. Methods in the scope include sand, glass-bead, and steel-shot 
blasting.  A segregated blast room is used with blast cabinets, often considered a standard piece 
of CRC cleaning equipment, to help control blasting emissions.  Buffers are often used in the 
general cleaning area but tough cleaning is often performed more effectively with blast cabinet 
cleaners. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Aggressive part cleaning is often performed with a handheld angle buffers over a downdraft table 
or bench-mounted buffer.  A cabinet-type blast cleaner is typically a more efficient (faster) tool if 
the piece part has a sensitive surface, and/or is heavily corroded or carbon coated.  Controlling 
the blast cabinet’s airborne debris is often difficult.  Most cabinets leak some abrasive dust when 
new, and get progressively worse with age.  Additionally, controlling airborne debris from bench 
grinders is difficult since the blast cabinet seals and extraction/separation system typically emit 
debris over a large space while running. 
 
The most effective debris control system uses cabinet blasters in a segregated room.  The room 
is built with one access door with a walk-through curtain.  The blasting room is ventilated with an 
exhaust fan that provides a negative pressure.  This assures general shop air is pulled into the 
room, preventing airborne debris from entering the shop area.  The extraction fan(s) typically run 
only while the blast cabinets are running.  This arrangement catches much more debris than 
standard practice, preventing it from drifting onto the cleaning technicians, previously cleaned 
parts, or into the shop area. 
 
Access to the room is restricted to only one doorway with a curtain to maximize shop-to-room 
airflow.  Note that some rooms have been built with three sides of walk-through curtains for 
maximum access. The extraction fans in these rooms, while substantial, could not create enough 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Blasting Enhancement 
DATE 
2/6/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1061  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 4 
airflow through the curtains to control the airborne debris and dust still drifted throughout the 
shop.  
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
-  Determine area in shop to be designated for blasting. 
• Assure cleaning area has supporting utilities (compressed air for blasting, lighting, and 
electricity as needed). 
• Assure area has adequate space and access for equipment/supplies, and parts staging 
(outside of blasting room). 
 
-  Research and choose blasting equipment 
• Size cabinets, exhaust fans, and supply storage equipment, to needs. 
• Establish equipment usability/configuration to assure easy cleaning/maintenance and 
professional appearance. 
• Consider glass-bead as well as steel-shot machines.  Suggest J-Belt tumbling design (as 
apposed to a rotating cage) for steel-shot type machines. 
 
-  Establish new/adjusted repair/rebuild time requirement targets as needed. 
• Eliminate the current processes/tooling/equipment strategy (only one best way). 
 
-  Install the layout/equipment changes into the shop 
• This may occur in phases, as needed, such as shop arrangement, then equipment final 
design/fabrication. 
• Promote change feedback as installation may surface new problems.  
 
-  Train employees to use the new procedures/equipment.  Follow-up/enforce 
immediately. 
• Suggest parts are staged outside of Blast area.  Transport parts cart to and from staging 
area immediately outside of blasting room. 
 
-  Establish equipment maintenance schedule/responsibility. 
 
-  Review process/equipment performance once established. 
 
-  Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
Saves Labor  – Well designed/organized cleaning equipment reduces cleaning efforts.  Less 
effort is required to maintain a clean work area and fewer parts need follow-up cleaning before 
assembly. 
 
Saves Time   – Parts are not staged in different areas for different types of cleaning, reducing 
work flow interruptions.  Protecting parts against airborne debris interferes less with cleaning. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Parts Blasting Enhancement 
DATE 
2/6/07 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1061  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 4 
Increases Quality  – More effective cleaning equipment simplifies cleaning processes and 
promotes high technician professionalism. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
-  Facility 
• Re-organize work area to allow for blasting room, blasting cabinet(s) placement, incoming 
and outgoing staging, and supply storage as needed. 
 
-  Support Equipment 
• Well-built blast cabinets, both manual and tumbling steel-shot cabinets. 
• Effective walk-through doorway curtain. 
• Sized-right exhaust system. 
• Miscellaneous supply storage and work area cleaning tools (brooms, dust pans, etc.). 
 
-  People 
• Establish current cleaning concerns with team 
• Establish process, layout, and equipment improvements through team. 
 
-  Training 
• Define/establish/enforce new processes, roles and responsibilities with production teams. 
• Remove replaced items (general-area blast cabinets) from operations to prevent less 
effective cleaning. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
None. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
0107-4.5-1060    Parts Buffer Enhancement 
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
Black Belt 
Cat Global Mining
