SOURCE: 4.0 Component Rebuild (CRC)\4.05 HSEC - CRC\3. Quick Win\Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working Environment.pdf
PAGES: 5
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
February 2007  
0207-4.4-1066  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Proper Lighting Provides 
Effective Working 
Environment  
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management  
Safety 
 
 
Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working 
Environment .............................................................. 1
 
1.0  Introduction ....................................................... 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 4 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 5 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat ® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network.  

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working 
Environment 
DATE 
4/12/2017 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.4-1066  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 5 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Component Rebuild Center (CRC) work bay lighting is critical to several facets of CRC operations.   
Proper lighting provides an effective working environment for rebuild technicians by allowing them 
to see the smallest details, improving parts reuse decisions and workmanship in general.  Good 
lighting also reduces eyestrain and worker fatigue, while promoting high professionalism to 
customers and employees.  A clean, well-lit environment promotes quality and leads the effort in 
setting an internal image of excellence for all the employees to follow in their daily tasks.   
 
Part reuse decisions are constantly being performed in a CRC.  Parts are being washed or 
otherwise salvaged.  Work is being performed above, below, and often inside small and large 
parts/components.  Improper lighting in any of these scenarios can contribute to technician errors 
in judgment or misread scales.  Installing unreusable parts, misadjusting systems, or missing 
process details may result in early component failure, short component service life, or possibly 
catastrophic failure.  Substandard lighting limits technician capability and physically promotes a 
substandard capability to the customers and employees.  Good shop lighting shows that the 
dealer is serious about promoting the quality advertised and sell.   
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Traditional shop lighting  efforts are generally based on ceiling lights.  A new shop will have 
more shadows and a generally darker environment with only ceiling lights.  Lighting deficiencies 
often go unnoticed given the many adjustments needed to assure work gets performed 
effectively.  As the shop’s walls, ceilings, floors, equipment, and light fixtures get dirtier (especially 
with unprotected concrete), they reflect less light, creating a darker shop.  This becomes more 
evident during the winter months with shorter days.  Shops with normally open doors (not 
recommended) will also be darker during colder months when the doors remain closed during the 
day.  Lighting is often improved by increasing the number of ceiling lights or random light fixtures 
in the shop.  These additions help but are generally ineffective given their height and/or location.  
It’s difficult to get enough ceiling lights to provide enough light with gray containers, equipment, 
and product, as well as dirty floors/walls absorbing much of it.  Roof skylights help, but only 
during the first shift on sunny days. 
 
Enhanced CRC lighting  provides a well-lit environment without excessive lighting costs or 
maintenance.  Effective lighting is provided through a comprehensive effort of coverage: ignoring 
one area will reduce lighting efficiency overall and provide inconsistent results.  Increasing efforts 
in other area(s) may not provide enough to compensate for the loss. 
• Ceiling lights are needed to provide enough genera l lighting for well-light aisles and bay 
work areas.  Most dealers require lighting engineers to assure enough lighting given a 
ceiling height and shop colors.  Roof-mounted skylights are highly recommended to provide 
natural lighting and reduce daytime lighting costs.  Skylights must not replace ceiling 
fixtures due to lighting needed during 2 nd  and 3 rd  shifts and other times with marginal 
outside lighting.  
• Sidelights are needed on walls and columns as need ed to reduce shadows.  Locate lights 
10-12 ‘ above shop floor.  These fixtures provide lighting for the work bay area, on the side 
and below major components, and workbench tops. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working 
Environment 
DATE 
4/12/2017 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.4-1066  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 5 
• Task/local lighting should be located above workbe nches.   These lights are typically 4’ 
fluorescent lights suspended at the center of the workbench approximately 7’ above the 
floor.  These fixtures are primarily for workbench tasks and parts inspections.  They also 
greatly supplement the sidelights since the workbenches are on the work bay perimeter 
and close to the major component. 
• Droplights are needed on every work bay perimeter,  on rewinding reels.  Stationary lighting 
fixtures are not capable of directing enough light to tasks, such as work on the inside of part 
cavities or parts in the middle of the work bay.  Droplights are best stored by suspending 
them from reels to assure: 
o The lights are easily retrieved for use. 
o Easily stored for cleanup/protection. 
o The technician does not substitute a lower wattage  flashlight.  
• Large bridge crane beams should have light fixture s to compensate as they often block 
ceiling lights when moved to a working position.  This prevents reducing the light under the 
hoist being used. 
• Use reflective colors in the shop to conserve avai lable light and create a professional work 
environment.  Smooth painted 
surfaces help prevent dirt/dust from 
sticking and are easier to clean. 
o Ceiling should have shiny or 
light painted surfaces – 
including structural beams/ 
trusses.  Avoid exposed spray-
on or paper-faced insulation as 
these surfaces absorb dirt and 
are difficult to clean without 
damage. 
o Walls are often painted tan or 
off-white up to 7’-8’ high to 
reduce noticeable staining.  The 
upper area of the wall should 
be painted white to reflect as 
much light as possible since it 
is much less vulnerable to 
staining. 
o Floors must be sealed 
(reapplied regularly) so 
oil/grease are not absorbed, 
dark staining is prevented, and 
cleaning efforts are reduced.  
Floors may be painted lighter 
than concrete (if impact 
damage is controlled) for 
maximum light reflection and 
cleaning ease. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working 
Environment 
DATE 
4/12/2017 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.4-1066  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 5 
o Paint equipment, especially cabinets, cranes, and workbenches, with bright yellow or 
another reflective color.  Use high-gloss paint for maximum durability and cleaning 
ease. 
• Keep the CRC clean to prolong its lighting effecti veness.  Attractive paint and effective 
lighting deteriorate quickly (along with employee pride) if not kept clean.  Focus on areas 
originating dirt, grease and airborne debris to control spreading contaminates. Maintain 
areas daily, especially disassembly/cleaning areas with: 
o Downdraft tables. 
o Contained blast cleaning. 
o Smooth painted walls. 
o Large oil-trapping grids in the floor. 
o Effective cabinet washer evacuation. 
o Utilities, such as air lines, on retracting reels.  
o Equipment/tool racks/cabinets to maintain organiza tion. 
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
• Assess the CRC’s status and document conclusions i n text and pictures. Focus on: 
o Lighting capability in every aisle, work bay, and corner.  Observe shadows and 
transient conditions with crane usage. 
o Special lighting needs, such as for detailed inspe ctions. 
o Lighting during all working shifts and with all do ors closed. 
o Typical shop cleanliness conditions and cleaning h abits. 
o Building and equipment colors.  Note reflectivity,  condition, and cleanliness. 
• Establish lighting needs, placement, and painting requirements. 
o Research/establish lighting specialist as a consul ting SME. 
o Establish lighting equipment suppliers and support  as needed. 
o Research Caterpillar equipment recommendations for  fixtures, arrangement, etc. 
o Determine painting resources and support services.  
• Develop and design CRC color scheme surface requir ements and paint types. 
• Adjust and document housekeeping requirements, pro cedures, roles and responsibilities 
(with quality checklists as needed). 
• Establish new repair/rebuild time requirement targ ets as needed. 
• Present strategy to shop employees. 
• Install the equipment changes into the shop (This may occur in phases as needed.) 
• Train employees to use the new procedures/equipmen t. Follow-up/enforce immediately. 
• Review process and equipment performance once esta blished. 
• Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
• Reduced non-chargeable (general cleaning) labor - work bay cleanliness is maintained 
during normal daily activity, not at the “end of period cleanup”.  Lighting better shows what 
should be cleaned.  Saved labor is applied to increased revenue, providing more profits. 
• Increased quality – more accurate parts reuse insp ections and more consistent cleaning 
standards.  Technicians provide effective workmanship due to less (eye and general) 
fatigue. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Proper Lighting Provides Effective Working 
Environment 
DATE 
4/12/2017 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.4-1066  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 5 
• Improved technician safety – obstacles are easier to see and maintaining cleanliness 
reduces airborne debris. 
• Improved CRC image – customers see a more professi onal rebuild environment, helping to 
increase price realization.  Employees experience a quality/professional environment, 
encouraging them to provide the same level of contribution in their efforts. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Investment costs vary, depending on lighting-relat ed gaps found and local labor/material 
costs: 
o Light fixture installation 
o New paint required on worn/abused equipment. 
o Preparation for building paint job(s) 
o Skylight installation. 
• Support Equipment 
o Equipment organization aids (racks, cabinets). 
o Airborne debris containment (downdraft tables, eva cuation systems, etc.) 
o Utility reels for effective cleaning efforts. 
o Used oil grids for oil containment. 
• People 
o Establish current painting, and other environmenta l< concerns with team. 
o Establish process, facility, and equipment improve ments through team. 
• Training 
o Establish the improvement benefits with the produc tion team. 
o Define, establish, and enforce the new process and  duties with the production team. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
None. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None. 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt
