SOURCE: 4.0 Component Rebuild (CRC)\4.03 Facility & Tooling\2. Tactical\CRC Hand Tool Management.pdf
PAGES: 5
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
CRC Hand Tool 
Management 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
 
CRC Hand Tool Management .................................... 0
 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 3 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 3 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 4 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
  
December 2006 
0107-4.4-1057 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Easy access to the correct tools is vital to shop efficiency. The majority of hand tools in most 
shops are owned by the technician and stored in his own personal toolbox. Mechanics owning 
their tools and toolboxes has been a common practice for many years. 
 
As more dealers focus on high efficiency, workflow, and optimum use of facility space, the culture 
of oversized personal toolboxes in the shop may no longer be acceptable. As shops have gone to 
second and even third shifts, some dealers have noticed that 20% or more of the available floor 
space in a work bay is occupied by personal toolboxes. 
 
 A Component Rebuild Center has several types of tools: 
• Generic hand tools: frequently used by a single technician, typically stored in a technician’s 
toolbox, and located in their work area when in use. 
• Area specific, community tools: frequently used tools by a group of technicians in a specific 
area of the shop (i.e. engine assembly bays). They are typically stored in an on-floor 
“community” storage cabinet. 
• Supplies, hardware, chemicals, etc., are stored in several areas of the shop, with both 
personal and community storage methods. 
• Tool crib stored tools. They are less frequently used tools.  
 
The key to effective tool (and tool cost) management is to place required tools in the work areas 
where they are used, and to minimize the requirements for a mechanic to own and store his own 
tools. Oversized toolboxes congest the shop floor, are difficult to move, and increase tool costs. 
Second and third shift requirements multiply the number of toolboxes present per work bay. Good 
tool management programs result in standard, smaller toolboxes and lower tool costs. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Toolbox sizes tend to grow over time, often unnoticed because it occurs gradually. Many 
technicians own the toolboxes they use and eventually upgrade to larger and larger capacity 
toolboxes because: 
• Seldom used but critical community tools are not readily available or consistently 
maintained.  Technicians end up buying too many of these tools for convenience. 
• The technician owns the toolbox and shop management does not regulate its size. 
• Generic supplies are not provided in a convenient, on-floor location for technician use. 
Technicians often collect and store a “parts stash” in their toolbox. 
• Technicians take pride in their tool collection, and take pride in displaying bigger, more 
extravagant toolboxes. 
 
Effective tool management provides the right tools at the right place.  Effective tool management 
includes many of these attributes: 
• All personal toolboxes are a standard size. 
• Shops provide the toolboxes, buying them in bulk to reduce costs.  Some shops only 
provide the lower roller cabinet (20” deep, 30” wide, and 38” tall), and the technician can 
add the upper tool chest as needed. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Hand Tool Management 
DATE 
2/18/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1057 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 1 of 4 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• Shops provide wall-mounted foldout toolboxes that store required work bay tools with peg-
board arrangements.   
• Community tool cabinets are located on-floor for technicians to quickly retrieve locally 
needed special tools. 
• Community hardware and chemical supply cabinets are located on the shop floor for easy 
retrieval. Quick inventory order sheets are often provided at the cabinet for easy re-supply 
charge-outs by technicians as needed.  The parts department inventories the cabinets. 
• Portable workbenches are located in each work bay for mid-bay workstations. This helps 
eliminate the large toolbox/workbench combinations. 
 
   
  
 
Examples of common area tool and supply storage.  
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1)  Determine the anticipated type/quantity of tools needed in the shop for each technician and/or 
work bay. Include: 
a) Standard hand-tools for each technician. 
b) Community tools for specific regions of the shop (example; engine disassembly bays). 
c) Chemicals needed to process the product (examples; gasket adhesive, anti-seize, etc). 
2)  Establish the types and number of toolboxes needed to store the tools.  
a) Personal, or personally assigned, roll-around toolboxes 
b) Wall-mounted foldout toolboxes for a specific work bay. 
c) Community tool cabinets for high cost, special, or seldom used tools. 
d) Community tool racks for items not applicable to a cabinet enclosure, such as straps, 
chains, pry bars, cribbing, etc. 
e) Community reference centers - identically organized for universal retrieval methods. 
f) Arrange for off-shift toolbox parking areas.  Areas in the path between the workshop and 
the washroom work well. 
3)  Determine the anticipated type/quantity of hardware/chemicals/consumables needed. 
4)  Establish the types and quantity of community cabinets needed to store the needed 
hardware/chemicals/consumables/references: 
a) Include charge-out sheets as needed. 
b) Anticipate the frequency of use when locating the centers. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Hand Tool Management 
DATE 
2/18/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1057 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 4 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
5)  Identify other workbench/other storage drawers that may become personal stashes for tools, 
literature, parts, etc.  Determine which will be eliminated. 
6)  Develop a toolbox/storage transition plan.  Include: 
a) Temporary storage accommodations as needed for eliminated toolboxes. 
b) Time frames for strategic changes for each shop/area. 
c) Changes of responsibility for community tools/supply inventories. 
7)  Present strategy to shop employees. For many mechanics, realize that this is a culture 
change and has some emotional factors. Some mechanics have made a large personal 
investment in their tools and toolbox. 
8)  Install the equipment/layout changes into the shop (may occur in phases as needed). 
9)  Train employees to use the new procedures/equipment. 
10)  Review process performance once established. 
11)  Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Increased service capacity – Less space is consumed by smaller toolboxes.  Fewer tools are 
duplicated with community tool centers.  Off-shift toolboxes may be stored outside of the 
production area. 
• Reduced labor: 
o The work bays are less congested with smaller/fewer toolboxes. 
 There are clearer paths around the product and subassembly work.. 
 There is more room to store, and have access to staged parts. 
 There is less to move, and fewer hard-to-reach corners when cleaning bays. 
o Technicians quickly move from bay to bay with smaller toolboxes and less congestion. 
o Supplies are more quickly available through organized supply centers. 
• Job flexibility – Bay to bay moves are easier with smaller toolboxes 
•  Reduced cost – Fewer tools are needed with organized community tool centers.  Fewer 
seldom-used tools are purchased when they are inventoried in the centers. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Investment costs vary depending on what program is chosen: 
o Roller cabinets provided with top chests ($750- $1,000 US each). 
o Roller cabinets only provided ($500- $700 US each). 
o Wall-mounted fold-out tool boxes (cost varies with size/quality) 
• Support Equipment/Efforts 
o Shared tool cabinets and inventories for on-floor tool centers. 
o Supply cabinets and inventory for on-floor community centers. 
o Labor in transferring tools/cabinets in and out of shop. 
• People 
o Establish current tool/equipment/cost concerns with team. 
o Establish process, layout, and equipment improvements through team. 
• Training 
o Establish the improvement benefits with the production team. 
o Define, establish, and enforce the new process and duties with the production team. 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Hand Tool Management 
DATE 
2/18/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1057 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
None. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None. 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
young_russell_k@cat.com 
(309) 675-4583 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
CRC Hand Tool Management 
DATE 
2/18/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0107-4.4-1057 
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 4
