SOURCE: 4.0 Component Rebuild (CRC)\4.04 CRC Management\2. Tactical\Cell-Specific Service Reports.pdf
PAGES: 6
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Cell-Specific Service 
Reports 
 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management 
Safety MARC 
Management 
 
 
Cell-Specific Service Reports ..................................... 1 
1.0 Introduction ........................................................ 2 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 2 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 5 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 6 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 6 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
April 2007 
0407-4.5-1067 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
Service reports are critical to effective CRC operations.  Service report writing is non-value 
adding and is typically performed differently by every technician in the shop.  Training technicians 
to write “good” service reports is performed many different ways as well.  Since the typical 
technician is seldom interested in spending time writing, comprehensive/consistent service 
reports are even harder to get. 
 
Effective service reports should be as brief as possible, while providing all the critical repair-
related information.  In general, the information is summarized as: 
 
• Complaint – Voice of the customer.  Symptoms, etc. 
• Cause – Root cause of failure, including the part and group numbers, etc. 
• Correction – How was the root cause corrected, and the resulting damage fixed, etc. 
 
Properly written service reports are valuable for several purposes: 
• Customer - Service-billing justification for additional work performed, operation corrections, 
maintenance enhancements, etc. 
• Warranty – “Original” revenue repair clarification for assessing warranty application. 
Service claim narrative development, and audit trail (proof of repair), etc. 
• Rebuild – Last repair/rebuild description/clarification for assessing the worn-out core’s 
rebuild-ability, etc. 
• Caterpillar – Failure related information for assessing the vehicle’s quality/capability, etc. 
 
Excellent service reports provide all critical information for several users.  Given the repetitive 
nature in many CRC workstations, several dealers have simplified service reporting with special 
cell-specific reporting forms.  Such forms combine the benefits of a service checklist and service 
report into one document, saving the technician time in writing. This Best Practice will address 
such service reporting methods and introduce examples of how dealers employ process 
checklists in their service report forms. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
Traditional service reporting simply utilized the familiar orange and white Caterpillar service 
report.  The form includes complaint, cause, and correction areas.  Additional notes can be added 
on the bottom of the form.  Limitations of this type of reporting include: 
• Technicians often do not complete much of the root cause information with machine-
specific identity because sub-component cores arrive with no machine serial number.   
• The report does not prompt the technician to include specific repair-related data such as 
measurements, etc. 
• Technicians typically include excess information when it is difficult for them to remember 
what data is really needed.  They spend many hours writing to “cover themselves,” “just in 
case”.  This wasted time expands when there is a lesser repair workload and the 
technicians need to keep themselves busy. 
• Those reviewing service report histories find themselves reading everything reported on a 
job instead of scanning the form for the information they need. Many pieces of critical 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Cell-Specific Cell Reports 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0307-4.5-1067 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 6 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
information are not recorded due to the technician trying to remember too many job-related 
issues. The report is written like a book with no index. 
• Many warranty repair jobs are returned to the CRC for further explanation or data to better 
explain failures and corrections.  Returning jobs is more frequent with non-Caterpillar OEM 
products due to the low staff experience with these situations and the required product 
data. 
• Some dealers write service history with lead employees or technical writers, due to the 
difficulty in capturing effective reporting from the technicians.  Although these reports may 
be more readable, they often end up under-reporting critical information due to 
communication gaps that typically occur when trying to relay highly detailed information.  
This method is also typically more costly than effective service reporting systems, given 
the number of employees involved. 
In general, traditional service reporting is a very generic process with little guidance to assist in 
capturing comprehensive and critical information.  This system costs dealers: 
• Excess labor when technicians over-report. 
• Excess administrative efforts when reported information is extensive or disorganized. 
• Excess cash flow expense and worsened customer relations when technicians under-
report. 
 
An improved service-reporting scheme provides several aids for the CRC technicians and 
administration staff to more effectively capture service information.  Reporting aids support 
rebuild goals of efficiency and quality by prompting job activities (such as spec lookup). Excess 
(non-value adding) activity is avoided. Such a system includes: 
• Cell-specific service reports to guide the technician that performs a relatively repetitive 
rebuild process.  These reports are created to support sub-component, sub-routine, or 
sub-process rebuild operations: 
• Brake Groups • Hydraulic Control Valves • Pumps - Oil 
• Cam/crank shafts • Major component assembly • Pumps - Water 
• Cooler Groups • Major component disassembly • Turbochargers 
• Cylinders heads • Major component test • Warranty – New Machine 
• Cylinder Blocks • Pistons, Rods & Liners • Warranty – New Parts 
• Fuel Systems • Planetary Groups • Warranty – Non-Cat 
 These service reports include some items from the traditional generic Caterpillar reports 
such as areas for Complaint, Cause, Correction, SIMS, etc.  They also include specific 
questions and or part descriptions in fields that require technician response.  These 
responses are in the form of short comments or checkboxes to show iron status or 
corrective actions.  Such prompts are especially important for Non-Cat warranty reports 
involving obscure data needs that technicians may not frequently encounter. 
• Cell-specific service reports use sequenced prompts and responses that match the rebuild 
process.  This consistency facilitates technician-to-technician training and promotes 
consistent skill development in the new employee. (See note below) 
• Cell specific service reports may be called “process checklists”.  These reports typically 
include rebuild task directives to prompt a technician to perform processes.  Certain steps 
may be required for every rebuild, or may only be required by earlier test results (Ex: if a 
technician can feel a valve stem wear step with his or her fingernail, then he or she must 
measure the stem diameter).  Tasks may be temporarily added to perform product updates 
or fixes. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Cell-Specific Cell Reports 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0307-4.5-1067 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 6 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• Cell-specific service reports may include a response field to record test specifications.  
This field makes it easy for the technician to record all of the needed Caterpillar specs at 
one time, much more efficient than revisiting the service manual when each spec is 
needed. The spec fields can also help prevent errors in memorization. 
• The cell-specific service reports may be designed for each type of component and for each 
CRC work area function.  The easiest way to distribute these reports is to simply keep 
them with the other work order information.  The reports can be designed to imitate the 
dealer’s electronic service report template and thus serve as a report entry guide. 
 
Note: 
• The reporting aids may not appear as useful to an experienced rebuild technician as they 
would be to an apprentice or inexperienced technician*.  While this is true for experienced 
technicians who perform the same rebuild operations every day, many experienced 
technicians move around a CRC completing various rebuild segments.  These aids 
become especially useful in prompting such activities. 
• The CRC provides a great environment to train new technicians for future promotion into 
machine repair work.  Typical succession plans include first learning about components in 
the CRC, then machine systems and diagnostics in the machine repair shop with later 
opportunities in field service.  This type of succession planning requires the CRC to 
continuously replenish itself with new employees.  Using cell-specific service reports with 
process prompting supports the lesser skilled employees and helps sustain consistent 
quality in key rebuild operations. 
 
*For the purposes of this Best Practice, a rebuild technician (“apprentice”) is lesser skilled 
and would not have the broad experience of a traditional service technician 
(“journeyman”).  The rebuild technician, in general, should be in the grooming stages to 
move into a diagnostic/repair technician position through a succession plan.  This is an 
important plan since most dealers develop their own technicians and must do so as 
effectively as possible. 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
1. Document/find the as-is service report methods and materials in the CRC rebuild areas. 
2. Define future rebuild reporting requirements and processes based on expected product type, 
volume, size, etc. 
a. Plan for typical rebuild volumes as well as expected repetitive nature of rebuilds. 
b. Investigate specialized reporting media and gathering/storage/retrieval equipment 
(template formats, electronic documents, server storage/distribution systems, on-floor 
terminals, etc.). 
c. Use Cat Service Operations Dev. and Information Systems expertise as needed. 
d. Review other dealer systems and results as needed. 
e. Focus on the typical reporting - 80-90% of reporting/storing/retrieving circumstances. 
f. Add-in flexible capabilities (such as special reporting templates for product 
improvements) for minority requirements. 
3. Apply improved reporting strategy to operations and shop areas. 
a. Develop report/checklist templates. 
b. Consider product updates in the reporting aids. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Cell-Specific Cell Reports 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0307-4.5-1067 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 4 of 6 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
c. Consider reporting enhancement replication outside of CRC (especially R&I functions).  
d. Include shop technician teams in the develop review/application stages. 
e. Include the Standard Job’s team in the development process.  
f. Use Cat Service Operations Dev. and Information Systems expertise as needed. 
4. Develop/document the new reporting strategy/procedure, with new roles/responsibilities as 
needed. 
5. Adjust  
a. Repair/rebuild time requirement targets as needed (capture resultant efficiencies). 
b. Service labor charge-out rates to reflect time and material repair efficiency gains. 
c. Administrative duties/tasks to reflect new system requirements and efficiency gains. 
6. Present strategy to shop employees. 
7. Implement reporting processes, templates, and system changes into the shop/office areas. 
a. This may occur in phases (as needed). 
8. Train employees/customers to use the new procedures.  Follow-up/enforce immediately. 
9. Eliminate previous reporting practices/systems to eliminate old habits. 
10. Review process/template performance once established. 
11. Establish and implement adjustments as needed. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Increased capacity - Fewer returned warranty work orders reduces task interruptions for staff - 
more time available (with less administrative rework) to plan/organize. 
• Reduced cost – Fewer returned warranty/policy work orders allows service/warranty staff to 
focus on current issues to reduce accounts-receivable associated with outstanding claims.  
Comprehensive reporting justifies revenue to customers, reducing policy allowance expense.  
Data organization (in tables, not paragraphs) enables faster operations/warranty processing. 
• Increase efficiencies - Service technicians are prompted on core reporting requirements, 
reducing associated labor.  Rebuild target times drop, raising standard (flat-rate) job profits. 
• Increased quality – Rebuild processes are prompted to be more consistent/accurate, 
increasing quality, especially with less experienced employees.  Training is conducted more 
consistently and focuses on critical tasks and product updates. 
• Improved Operator/Technician Safety – Properly trained technicians perform tasks in a safer 
manner, reducing overall risk exposure. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Equipment Requirement Gaps Vary 
o Most dealers already have computer and electronic template capability. 
o Report forms are typically custom-designed and require wide participation for effective 
buy-in. 
• Facility 
o Technicians need aisle-accessible PC terminal space to retrieve specs and submit 
electronic reporting (if required).  Difficult/expensive for staff to effectively perform this 
function. 
• Support Equipment - Costs vary greatly per region 
o Technicians need on-floor terminals to effectively retrieve spec’s and submit electronic 
reporting (if required).  Difficult/expensive for staff to effectively perform. 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Cell-Specific Cell Reports 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0307-4.5-1067 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 5 of 6 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES 
 
• People 
o Establish current reporting concerns with team. 
o Establish process, systems, and equipment improvements through team. 
• Training 
o Define, implement, and enforce the new process, systems, and duties with the 
production team. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
• Component Rebuild Service Operations Development & Assessment (SODA) 
 
• Sample Service Reports (see attachments in this PDF file) 
o Cylinder Block Inspection & Reconditioning Report 
o Fuel System Test Sheet 
o Connecting Rod Checkoff Sheet 
o 3400 Series Engines – Quality Control Check List 
 
Note: Report form examples are actual dealer examples and do not represent 
Caterpillar-development. 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
None. 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
young_russell_k@cat.com 
(309) 675-4583 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Cell-Specific Cell Reports 
DATE 
2/19/2015 
CHG 
NO 
01 
NUMBER 
0307-4.5-1067 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 6 of 6
