SOURCE: 4.0 Component Rebuild (CRC)\4.01 Rebuild Processes (CRC)\1. Strategic\Material Transport Strategy.pdf
PAGES: 6
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
  
June 2006  
0207-4.5-1063  
  
 
    
    
    
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
Material Transport 
Strategy 
Application Maintenance Site 
Management 
Component 
Rebuild 
Component 
Life 
Management  
Safety 
 
 
 
Material Transport Strategy ....................................... 1
 
1.0  Introduction ....................................................... 2 
2.0  Best Practice Description .................................. 2 
3.0  Implementation Steps ........................................ 4 
4.0  Benefits ............................................................. 5 
5.0  Resources Required .......................................... 5 
6.0  Supporting Attachments / References ............... 5 
7.0  Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0  Acknowledgements ........................................... 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER:  The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat 
® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices”. Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network.  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT  THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Material Transport Strategy 
DATE 
2/23/07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.5-1063  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 2 of 6 
1.0 Introduction  
 
A parts/component transport strategy is critical to several facets of CRC operations.  Transport 
begins with major component receipt and ends with major component release to the customer, 
parts department, etc. These activities are non-value adding and are typically unplanned and ad-
hoc in nature. Rebuild materials should be moved between processing steps in a manner that 
consumes minimal resources (time, labor, equipment). Effective part/component moving reduces 
equipment and staging space requirements and technician rebuild labor. 
 
An effective transport strategy stresses consistency and minimizes “lost” in-process product.  
Production peaks are less costly and easier to manage due to greater process realization.  
Properly used, an enhanced material handling strategy provides increased capacity, efficient 
parts flow, and better labor utilization. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
For the scope of this Best Practice, CRC material handling begins with component receipt from 
the customer at the dealer store. It ends with the component’s release to the customer at the 
dealer store.  The “customer” may also include dealer pick-up and delivery trucks, or dealer field 
service trucks that transport components. 
 
Current practice is typically ineffective and inconsistent. 
• Once the customer arrives with the component, it i s often unloaded by rebuild (production) 
technicians while supervisors “meet and greet” the customer.  Unloading and customer 
communications is often inefficient since many employees (the closest ones to the customer’s 
component) perform these tasks. These inefficiencies are similar to those occurring when the 
rebuilt components are loaded-out to the customer.  
• Once the components are received, the production e mployee must move the component from 
staging, to washing, to disassembly/cleaning, etc., until the rebuilt component is packaged to 
ship-out. 
• During each component move, the employee typically  must: 
o Find a lift truck (often in use, or left in random  parking places). 
o Find lifting brackets, chains, and straps (often i n use, or left in random locations). 
o Find component stands for components brought in, p ropped-up on cribbing. 
o Interrupt their core duties and resume them later (at the expense of efficiency and 
quality). 
An enhanced material transport strategy is customer friendly and efficient. Generally, the parts 
department (properly trained and equipped material handlers) must be responsible for almost all 
heavy material transfers. They are responsible for operating and maintaining transport equipment. 
Skilled material handlers are trained to use the most effective transport equipment and already 
transport new, Reman, and exchange/core items. These parts runners continuously travel 
throughout the dealer’s branch. In fact, “empty” return trips are an efficiency opportunity. All heavy 
material transfers should be restricted to these material handlers.  Allowing the parts department 
to focus on effective material movement frees the CRC to focus on rebuilding components. The 
remainder of this description will describe each significant type of material movement and its 
considerations. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT  THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Material Transport Strategy 
DATE 
2/23/07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.5-1063  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 3 of 6 
Delivery from 
customer 
Component 
Transfer 
Appropriate 
staging location 
Service Dept. 
wash bay 
Other bays as 
needed 
Parts Dept. and Material Handlers 
 
 
• All customer receipt and ship 
functions are handled by the parts 
department. To receive 
components: they meet/greet, 
unload, and stage components. 
They then transfer components to 
the proper area per the situation. 
For example, Reman and 
exchange cores would have 
different destinations. Once the 
component is needed, the parts 
department transfers it from 
(protected and organized) staging 
to the service department wash 
bay, and then to the disassembly 
bay. Once the component is rebuilt 
and sealed, the parts department 
transfers it to staging and eventually to the customer’s vehicle. 
• New, Reman, and core items are received between th e parts warehouse and specific CRC 
work bays. This delivery is performed by the material handlers. Technicians do not transfer 
parts from a central “will-call” or drop area to their work bays.   
• Components are moved between work bays as needed f or processing. The majority of 
component moves are performed by material handlers. For example: The handler would 
transfer sub-components from rebuild bay staging to general assembly bays per a component 
consist list. Each CRC should be equipped with generic, low-platform push carts (stored under 
a work bench) for incidental parts moves. This allows for process flexibility with minimal lift 
truck requirements. 
• Miscellaneous items (such as salvage, warranty, or  customer hold parts, tools, stands, 
baskets) are moved from work bay “out” areas, to other storage/ processing areas. These 
moves may be within a shop, between buildings, or from one branch to another. 
• These processes should be utilized for the majorit y of transports. While minimizing incidental 
transfers/handling by service technicians, such incidents cannot be prevented entirely. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT  THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Material Transport Strategy 
DATE 
2/23/07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.5-1063  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 4 of 6 
• Effective communication is critical for this strat egy’s success. Technicians and administration 
must have work bay and office access to call on material handlers.  Systems such as in- and 
out-staging areas, tags, etc., provide for efficient material hand-offs. Tags are also used to 
organize and direct transport for down-stream processes, such as salvage directions and 
priorities. One dealer installed “help” lights at bay pick-up/drop-off locations. The lights 
provided directives to material handlers in the area and were even more effective than first 
anticipated.  
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
 
The suggested implementation is as follows: 
 
1. Document as-is material moves, participants, and  resources required. 
2. Define future transport strategy based on expect ed product type, volume, size, etc. 
a. Plan for typical rebuild volumes as well as expe cted peak production business cycles. 
b. Investigate specialized transport/handling equip ment (radios, intercom, cranes, lift truck 
attachments, tugs, carts, shelves, chains, racks, etc.). 
c. Utilize Cat Operations Development and shop equi pment supplier expertise as needed. 
d. Focus on the typical requirements, covering 80-9 0% of transport circumstances.       
Add-in flexible capabilities (such as assigned push carts) for minority requirements. 
3. Apply future strategy to shop and staging area l ayout plans. 
a. Consider the effects of staging location on prod uct protection and flow paths. 
b. Add changes to shop layout drawing. 
c. Include shop technician teams in the review/appl ication stages. 
d. Use Cat Facility Development and Service Operati ons expertise as required. 
4. Develop/document the new material transport stra tegy/procedure, with new roles and 
responsibilities. 
5. AdjustF 
a. Repair/rebuild time requirement targets as neede d (capture resultant efficiencies). 
b. Service labor charge-out rates to reflect time a nd material repair efficiency gains. 
c. Administrative duties to reflect new system requ irements and efficiency gains. 
6. Present strategy to shop employees. 
7. Implement transport processes, layout, and 
equipment changes into the shop/storage areas. 
a. This may occur in phases (as needed). 
8. Train employees/customers to use the new 
procedures/equipment.  Follow-up and enforce 
immediately. 
9. Review process/equipment performance once 
established. 
10. Establish and install any adjustments as needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Help light installed at a pick-up location indicating 
material ready to be picked up 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT  THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Material Transport Strategy 
DATE 
2/23/07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.5-1063  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 5 of 6 
4.0 Benefits 
 
• Increased capacity: Reduced task interruptions, re duced rebuild turnaround times, increased 
component rebuilds per year. Administration has more time available (with less customer 
contact) to plan and organize. 
• Reduced cost: Fewer moving tools (lift trucks) are  needed less often. Related equipment 
maintenance and repairs are reduced. 
• Increase efficiencies: Service technicians focus o n core duties reducing labor variances.  
Rebuild and target times drop, raising standard (flat-rate) job profits. 
• Increasing quality: Rebuilt components incur less incidental damage and contamination, while 
technicians focused on core duties reducing rework. 
• Improved Operator/Technician Safety: Trained mater ial handlers increase professionalism 
and technician-handling problems are eliminated.  
 
5.0 Resources Required 
 
• Equipment Requirement Gaps Vary 
o Most dealers already have more transport equipment  than is needed for this strategy. 
o Bay-specific staging racks/equipment are often cus tom made by the dealer shop. 
• Facility 
o Staging space (protected) is located in parts depa rtment and each CRC work bay. 
• Support Equipment - Cost vary greatly per region 
o Effective cranes provide highest efficiency and sh ipping/receiving professionalism but 
lift truck are often the economic choice. 
o Staging racks, carts, stands, and protection for i ncoming components. 
o Staging racks and protection for out-going compone nts. 
o Protective staging areas for incoming/out-going co mponents. 
o Standard and custom designed carts for bay-to-bay material movement. 
o Communication equipment (radios, intercoms, “help”  lights) is low cost but critical. 
o Floor pallets typically consume lots of space and their use is discouraged. 
• People 
o Establish current staging concerns with team. 
o Establish process, layout, and equipment improveme nts through team. 
• Training 
o Define, implement, and enforce the new process and  duties with the production team. 
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
 
Component Rebuild Service Operations Development & Assessment (SODA) 
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
 
In-Process Staging Strategy   1106-4.4-1038  
Recommended Shipping and Storage Stands for Major Components   0107-4.4-1053  

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
CAT GLOBAL MINING 
 
DEALER BEST PRACTICE SERIES  
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT  THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR  
Material Transport Strategy 
DATE 
2/23/07 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0207-4.5-1063  
Caterpillar Confidential:  GREEN          Page 6 of 6 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
Russ Young 
6 Sigma Black Belt 
Cat Global Mining
