SOURCE: 5.0 MARC Management\5.01 MARC Market Strategy and Rate Development\3. Quick Win\Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate Development.pdf
PAGES: 6
ENCRYPTED: False
DECRYPT: 


===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE 
Localizing a Centerline File 
for MARC Rate 
Development
 
Maintenance and 
Repair Application Component Life 
Management 
 
Component 
Renewal (CRC) 
 
MARC  
Management 
 
 
 
1.0
 Introduction ........................................................ 1 
2.0 Best Practice Description ................................... 1 
3.0 Implementation Steps ........................................ 2 
4.0 Benefits .............................................................. 4 
5.0 Resources Required .......................................... 4 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References ............... 4 
7.0 Related Best Practices ...................................... 5 
8.0 Acknowledgements ............................................ 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and potential benefits included in this document are based upon information provided by 
one or more Cat
® dealers, and such dealer(s) opinion of “Best Practices.” Caterpillar makes no representation or warranty 
about the information contained in this document or the products referenced herein. Caterpillar welcomes additional “Best 
Practice” recommendations from our dealer network. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
October 2014 
0907-3.3-1086 
  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
1.0 Introduction  
 
The Global (sometimes referred to as factory) LCC (Life Cycle Cost) maintenance and repair 
centerline is a theoretical baseline of operating cost parameters, derived collaboratively with each 
product group, and based on medium application.  The sole safe-source for these files include the 
CGM Builder downloads page (for Builder Centerline files), and the AMT production server for 
AMT Centerline files).  Most expanded mining product centerlines are built using AMT software, 
and traditional CGM machines are built using Builder software. Regional MARC Consultants 
(RMC’s) will have access to the latest AMT Centerline files, and Builder files are available for 
download. 
 
This LCC centerline development process is a critical input to support any O&O (Owning and 
Operating), or TCO (Total Cost of Ownership) cost estimation.  Operating cost is comprised of 
energy requirements, repair cost (including undercarriage), planned maintenance cost, and 
special wear items.  Reference the latest edition of the O&O chapter found in the Caterpillar Inc. 
performance handbook for a comprehensive list of criteria.  LCC Centerline development 
provides baseline maintenance and repair cost per hour rate calculation in support of CSA 
(Customer Support Agreements) and MARCs (Maintenance And Repair Contracts). 
 
An LCC centerline is a collection of tasks that define equipment servicing activities (minor/major 
repairs, overhauls, inspections, maintenance, replacement, etc.). These strategy tasks or repair 
options are performed at pre-determined design life or “time” intervals (measured in machine 
hours, tons, calendar, etc.) on a given equipment, assembly, or a component. Costs of the tasks 
are derived from service task job operations, detailing the scope, parts, labor, and any 
miscellaneous requirements associated with the servicing task.  
 
Global LCC centerlines should not be confused with or used verbatim in site, customer or 
application specific needs, nor should it be construed as a MARC (Maintenance and Repair 
Contract) rate.  These centerlines should be used as a starting point during the localization 
process. 
 
2.0 Best Practice Description 
 
The objective of this MARC rate localization process is to build rates that are:  
• Machine, customer and mine-site specific.  
• Realistic and achievable.  
• Reflective of what a dealer can deliver.  
 
This document provides process guidelines to support localization (modification) of global LCC 
centerline files.  This will ensure that the rate accurately reflects the repair strategy of the 
Dealership, the configuration of the machine, and that the Dealer can deliver what is specified in 
the centerline file. This process will result in reasonable estimates in support of quoting a MARC 
contract (no attempt is made or implied to provide precise hourly costs). This best practice will 
also include examples of the mechanisms of how to accomplish localization using Builder G3 and 
AMT software.   
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate 
Development 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0907-3.3-1086 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 1 of 5 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
The centerline user community should use the global LCC centerline file as a starting point, but it 
will need to be localized/modif ied to achieve a realistic, regional, site specific and dealer 
attainable LCC rate to suit equipment and site conditions.   
 
 
3.0 Implementation Steps 
Under no circumstance should a global LCC centerline file be used as a MARC rate without 
reviewing each strategy task / repair option and by selecting the appropriate strategy task / repair 
option for the application. 
 
Ensure users start with the most current LCC centerline available. Changes/updates  to the global 
LCC centerlines will be communicated to the Dealers, regions  and to RMCs and the centerline 
files will be posted either on mining.cat.com builder downloads page or on the AMT production 
server (contact your local RMC for access to the latest AMT Centerline files) . The dealer connect  
site “Maintenance and Repair Contract (MARC) Management” will be the primary method used to 
facilitate communications of updates, exchange information, and transfer LCC centerline change 
knowledge among LCC centerline users and stakeholders.   
 
It is imperative that all stakeholders join this Dealer connect site in order to receive the 
information. This process will ensure global centerline change knowledge is distri buted 
appropriately to regions, RMC’s and to Dealers.   
 
In addition to using the global LCC centerline as a start, there are several localization aspects that 
must be reviewed.  T he following localization criteria must be reviewed for each repair option / 
strategy task and modified as necessary to ensure the Dealership can deliver within the CSA 
/MARC proposal: 
 
• Selecting the appropriate repair options/strategy tasks  
Certain major and minor assemblies will have different repair options available. For instance, a 
797F mining truck’s engine may have the option of recondition or replacing with Reman. Both 
repair options/strategy tasks will be listed on the Centerli ne. In order to choose the appropriate 
strategy task for the application, the user must know the preferred repair strategy of the 
Dealership for major and minor components. Note: Some LCC files contain alternate and 
redundant repair options that could inflate the MARC rate if a single preferred repair strategy is 
not selected.  This will inflate costs if alternate and redundant options are included (in addition 
to the preferred repair option).  For example, two mutually exclusive strategies may exi st at the 
same service interval and either the ‘Recondition before Failure’ or the ‘Replace with Cat 
Reman’ strategy task must be used – not both since they are conflicting.   
 
In order to choose the appropriate Repair Options/strategy tasks for the application, the user 
must know the actual machine configuration in terms of mandatory and optional attachments. 
Optional attachments or optional configurations are identified by “If Equipped (IEQ)” in the job 
condition field in Builder G3 or by cost bearer selection in AMT.  “External” cost bearer will 
indicate that the strategy task is an option / or typically excluded from contract rates.  If it 
should be included in any rate calculation, it must be changed to “Contract”.  A Dealer may use 
the actual Machine Shipping Order (MSO), or may retrieve the machine consist from SIMSi 
(Service Information Management System) at the following web address: 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate 
Development 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0907-3.3-1086 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 2 of 5 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
https://sims.cat.com/sims/simsi/index.jsp A PDF example of what the SIMSi Product 
Configuration search will produce is provided in the ‘Supporting Attachments/References’ 
section of this Best Practice.  
 
• First / Frequency Interval hours - PCR (Planned Component Replacement)  
It is imperative to  use realistic and achievable component lives.  Artificial PCR (Planned 
Component Replacement) life inflation (without sufficient data to corroborate) which lowers the 
rate should NEVER be used to gain financial competiveness.  An acceptable rate reduction  
strategy should consider tenants of Rate Commercialization which is an acceptable  CGM 
mechanism in place to support competitive bids.  Poor decision strategies such as artificially 
inflating PCR lives may lead to unprofitable business decisions, and ultimately brand erosion 
since component lives will most likely not achieve expectations. 
 
While not all PCR deviations need to be reviewed by the global MARC teams, guidance for 
PCR life increases which requires a global MARC team review may include (but is no t limited 
to) any change that will reduce the scope by at least one rebuild/overhaul during  the term of 
the contract. 
 
• Labor Hours 
Due to regional dealer variances and varying skill sets, the global centerline labor hours will 
need to be reviewed and may need to be modified to suit local competency levels, and number 
of tradespeople per repair option.   The centerline labor hours (Duration and Labor Hours) for 
R&I and Recondition jobs are estimates and should be reviewed and adjusted based on local 
expertise and experience.   
 
• Labor Rates 
Ensure the labor rates in the Builder Labor Table / AMT quick editor labor rates are configured 
for your Dealership’s rates.  You should review the total costs associated with each Repair 
Option / Strategy Task  to make sure your Dealership can deliver at this cost.  It is each 
Dealer’s responsibility to configure the rates with established Field/Shop labor rates. 
 
• Parts replacement percentages 
Based on local conditions, application , repair strategy, maintenance and operating  practices, 
individual part replacement percentages may need to be adjusted from the global centerline 
position.  This is  based on local expertise and experience. 
 
• Dealer part pricing/part identification 
Obtain the appropriate regional dealer pricing file (s), and I mport the latest parts pricing into 
your centerline file.  This provides DN (Component Unit Cost) and SCL (Component Unit List) 
for that specific region.  CAT Global Mining Parts & Pricing (CGMPP), and the local Dealer 
price tapes are the sole safe- sources for CGM parts pricing information.  Next Ge n SIS and 
SIS web are sole safe- sources for CGM parts  data (excluding pricing) , drawings and 
identification. 
 
• Salvage opportunities 
CGM Centerline files developed with Caterpillar engines include Job Operations within the 
Engine Overhaul Repair Options for salvage work for the cylinder block and crankshaft. Engine 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate 
Development 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0907-3.3-1086 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 3 of 5 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
block and engine crankshaft Salvage costs are provided in the centerline files based on actual 
dealer cost data.  A spreadsheet (found on the Builder downloads page in the supporting 
documents section) details  actual DN costs of the crank and block  for specified engines . The 
source CRC data was used to provide accurate cost for salvaging the engine block and 
crankshaft for both first and second overhaul.  Use the existing actual cost structure if you 
have no machine history on salvage.  Y ou will need to modify the %  replacement of the 
components to reach the average actual CRC costs identified in the spreadsheet. If your 
dealership has accumulated statistically significant sample size, change the % replacement 
value to match your current actual salvage cost.  
Not all Build er files have been updated to reflect the salvage costs. Use the spreadsheet on 
the Builder downloads to represent the salvage costs to the engine block and crankshaft. 
 
• Custom Repair Options 
Add any custom Repair Options  / Strategy Tasks that may be required.  For example, if there 
are certain regulatory / safety requirements needed in your region, a ‘Safety Inspection’ might 
need to be included and performed every 250 hours and assigned 2 hours  of labor to the job 
since it is a required local regulatory r equirement.  Alternately, if it is customary for your 
Dealership to perform CM (Condition Monitoring ) services as part of the CSA arrangement, 
these CM repair options / strategy tasks should be added to the centerline. 
 
The attached document illustrates various examples of how to tailor the centerline Builder or AMT  
file in order to: 
• Match the machine configuration sold to the customer. 
• Reflect the repair strategy of the Dealership for major and minor components. 
• Review a nd edit labor hours, PCR intervals, parts replacement percentages, salvage 
opportunities, etc. 
To implement this Best Practice, apply the same logic that is outlined in the examples within the 
supporting PowerPoint documents. 
 
4.0 Benefits 
The Benefit of applying this process when localizing global LCC centerline files is assurance that 
your MARC or other CSA rate will be: 
• Machine and mine-site specific. 
• Realistic and achievable. 
• Reflective of what a dealer can deliver. 
 
5.0 Resources Required 
AMT and or BuilderG3 software.   
 
6.0 Supporting Attachments / References 
• Estimating Owning and Operating Costs.pdf - Caterpillar Performance handbook, 
• CGM Centerline File Localization.pptx – Instructions contained in this Best Practice in 
PowerPoint format  
• SIMS Product Configuration Example.pdf – Sample product consist printout from SIMSi.  
 
  
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate 
Development 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0907-3.3-1086 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 4 of 5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
 
 
MINING DEALER BEST PRACTICE  
 
7.0 Related Best Practices 
0906-5.05-1009 MARC Rate Development 
1006-3.3-1024 Ensuring MARC Profitability 
0807-3.3-1085 Updating builder files with current parts 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
This Best Practice was written by: 
 
William L. Gallagher 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
Gallagher_William_L@cat.com 
+1 309 675-8085 
 
Revised by: 
Chris Byrnes 
Caterpillar Global Mining 
Product Support Consultant 
Byrnes_Christopher_J@cat.com 
+1 414 301-8149 
 
THE INFORMATION HEREIN MAY NOT BE COPIED OR TRANSMITTED TO OTHERS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF CATERPILLAR 
Localizing a Centerline File for MARC Rate 
Development 
DATE 
2/20/2015 
CHG 
NO 
02 
NUMBER 
0907-3.3-1086 
Caterpillar Confidential:  YELLOW          Page 5 of 5
